Unit IntroductionManaging Stakeholder Relationships
Last updated: 08/01/25

2
Managing Stakeholder Relationships
Unit Introduction
The key elements of 
the unit

3
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsWelcome to the Unit
Welcome to Unit 509: Managing Stakeholder Relationships.
Here we will introduce you to the key elements of the unit and provide an insight into how to 
get the most from your studies.
Let’s start with a tour of the content covered in this unit.

4
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsThe Unit Content
Over the next four lessons, we’ll explore the types and purposes of stakeholder relationships, 
and the skills required to develop them to their full potential.
In the first lesson, we’ll identify different types of stakeholders, and explain why it’s important 
for organisations to build relationships with them. We’ll also explore how stakeholder influence 
varies, and learn about some of the challenges organisations face when working with these 
groups.
In lesson two, we’ll consider how to engage stakeholders to develop and sustain relationships 
with them. We’ll also examine the ways in which managers can create a plan to begin the 
engagement process.

5
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsThe Unit Content (cont.)
The third lesson looks more deeply at the forms that engaging stakeholders may take in 
practice. We’ll focus on how managers can use collaborative techniques to build relationships, 
and manage conflict when it arises.
Finally, in lesson four, we’ll learn about how organisations analyse the impact of stakeholder 
engagement on performance. We’ll start by examining the different effects, before seeing how 
these can be monitored and measured.

6
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsThe Importance of this Unit
Understanding how to build and maintain relationships with stakeholders is a key responsibility 
for a senior manager. 
Whether you’re an experienced leader or newer to management, this unit will help you to 
develop mastery in this area, and serve you well as you progress in your role.

7
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsThe Structure of the Unit
Each unit is split up into lessons, which are in turn divided into four sections: 
• Learn
• Test
• Apply
• Insights
The Learn section is built around short video lectures, which introduce you to the learning 
content covered in the unit. In some lessons, you’ll also find written materials that expand on 
the concepts in more detail.
The Test section includes a set of self-check questions that ensure you have grasped the 
content of the lesson.

8
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsThe Structure of the Unit (cont.)
The Apply section is made up of practical exercises, which aim to assess your knowledge in 
more depth. You’ll find them helpful as you prepare for any end-of-unit assignments, and 
they’ll build a record of your learning as you progress. If you’re studying for the Operations 
Manager apprenticeship, this work can also be used as evidence of the relevant knowledge 
criteria.
The Insights section provides carefully selected concepts, reading material and other resources 
to enrich your learning, and broaden your knowledge of the topics covered in each lesson. You 
can use this section to stretch and challenge yourself, and gain a deeper understanding of the 
subject matter.

9
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsAssignment
Once you reach the end of the lessons for this unit, you may be required to submit a written 
assignment. This will be based on the assessment criteria set out within the unit.
To help you prepare, your tutor will provide you with an assessment brief. This will contain 
further instructions, as well as the tasks you must complete.
As you go through each of the topics covered in the assessment criteria, you can begin to plan 
how you will approach the assignment. Doing this may help to ease any pressure you feel as 
the deadline gets closer.
There is a designated portal where you can upload your assignment. Here, you will also find 
useful guides on assignment preparation and referencing. Your tutor will explain how you can 
submit draft work for feedback in advance of the final deadline.

10
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsStudy Tips
Before you get started, here are a few tips to help you get the most out of your studies:
Set aside enough time to complete your tasks every week. You’ll find it helpful to keep track of 
the unit calendar, so you don’t fall behind.
We recommend that you attempt all the questions and activities in each of the sections. We 
provide ‘correct’ and ‘incorrect’ feedback and model answers to support your understanding.
Physically write notes when studying either online or in the classroom. Research consistently 
shows that even just the process of writing detailed notes helps greatly with learning. We have 
provided you with a Study Notepad and pen in your Welcome Pack.
 
Once again, welcome to Unit 509. We hope you enjoy your studies.

11
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsRecap
In this unit introduction, you have learned about:
• The key elements of the unit

