1
Managing Stakeholder Relationships
Lesson 2Managing Stakeholder Relationships

2
Managing Stakeholder Relationships
Engaging Stakeholders
How organisations 
engage stakeholdersThe role of the 
managerThe benefits 
of creating an 
engagement plan

3
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsStakeholder Expectations
As we’ve seen, stakeholder relationships are based on mutual exchange, and each party has its 
own needs and expectations in this process.
To develop the relationship and make it fully reciprocal, an organisation must make its 
own expectations clear - for example, through contracts - but it must also understand the 
expectations of its stakeholders.

4
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsStakeholder Expectations (cont.)
So for instance, if the stakeholder is an 
investor, the organisation’s leaders will 
need to understand the level of risk they 
are willing to tolerate before they are asked 
to commit funds. If the stakeholder is an 
entire community - as in the case of an 
infrastructure project - then their diversity 
of viewpoints must be considered to 
understand who will support or oppose it.
Failure to clarify what the expectations 
are - and to act on them - can have serious 
consequences.

5
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsStakeholder Expectations - Example
Consider the example of Facebook. 
In 2020 the social media 
giant came under fire from its 
advertisers for failing to control 
hate speech and misinformation 
on its site.
Among other issues, major 
companies like Honda America 
and Levis Strauss were dismayed 
to find their adverts appearing 
next to extreme content, giving 
the impression the companies 
approved of it.

6
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsStakeholder Expectations - Example (cont.)
Although Facebook announced some changes to its practices, 
they were not enough to reassure their stakeholders, who 
joined a boycott against it. The boycott eventually involved over 
1000 organisations, cost the company millions in ad revenue, 
and affected its stock price.
The experience of Facebook shows that even large and 
wealthy organisations can underestimate what really matters 
to stakeholders - especially if they’ve come to rely on them. 
But stakeholder loyalty can’t be taken for granted; it must be 
nurtured through active ‘engagement.’

7
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsStakeholder Engagement
Engagement is the part of stakeholder management that involves actual 
interaction with a stakeholder; its goal is to improve the relationship so 
that both parties feel their needs are being met.
The activities that make up engagement can cover a wide range, but 
most involve proactive communication. Seeking out stakeholder views 
through surveys, providing updates through newsletters, and hosting 
meetings and events are all means of engagement. These methods will 
often be combined when pursuing a more complex objective, like a joint 
project.
For an organisation, the payoff for all this effort is a stakeholder who 
feels valued and respected, and therefore more likely to support it on a 
long term basis. Such stakeholders are also likelier to ‘buy-in,’ or commit, 
to the organisation’s riskier projects. This can help the relationship 
weather potential setbacks, like changes to budgets or delivery dates.

8
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsStakeholder Power
However, the level of engagement practiced by the organisation will vary depending on the 
identity of the stakeholder.
The researchers Andrew L. Friedman and Samantha Miles argue that the depth of engagement 
is determined by the stakeholder’s power.
When stakeholders have low levels of power, engagement mainly takes the form of ‘informing’ 
them, and ‘explaining’ the company’s positions.

9
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsPartnerships
As the stakeholder’s power rises, the organisation 
begins to ‘consult’ them more extensively. 
Stakeholders become more involved in the 
company’s work, perhaps ‘collaborating’ on 
individual projects.
At the highest levels of engagement, stakeholders 
may form ‘partnerships’ with the organisation, and 
even take charge of decision making - as in the 
case of shareholders in a publicly traded company.

10
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsManaging Stakeholder Engagement
The complex nature of engagement requires some forethought and planning, and this 
responsibility will generally rest with the managers in the organisation.
Although lower level staff may interact with stakeholders, it’s the managers who will create 
plans for how to approach them. So, for example, the employees of a call centre will speak to 
customers on a daily basis, but their conversations will be guided by management’s strategy for 
customer relations.

11
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsEngagement Hierarchies
Not all managers will engage with stakeholders in the same way, however.
The senior management team - the people responsible for the company’s overall strategy - 
will direct engagement with key external stakeholders, like investors and important clients. 
Middle managers with an ‘externally’ facing role, such as marketing or sales managers, will also 
interact with these stakeholders. But their planning role will be limited to stakeholders at their 
own level and below.

12
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsEngagement Hierarchies (cont.)
A similar hierarchy applies to engagement with internal stakeholders. Here the manager’s 
rank will determine the scope of the planning. Senior managers will make plans and policies 
that affect relations with all employees in the company, including the staff working directly for 
them. Managers further down the ranks will only do so for their own teams.
Regardless of their place in the company, all managers will need to think strategically about 
their stakeholder approach.

13
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsKrick and Forstater’s Framework
Engagement is a crucial part of stakeholder 
management, but to be most effective, it must 
be adapted to suit particular stakeholders. This 
means it’s generally planned ahead of time.
Researchers Thomas Krick, Maya Forstater 
and colleagues have developed a five stage 
framework for engagement that emphasises 
planning. The framework may be applied to 
both new and existing stakeholders, as these 
relationships can change over time, requiring 
new approaches.

14
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsKrick and Forstater’s Framework - Stage 1
One of the key elements of this 
framework is that any engagement 
approach should fit within the broader 
goals of the organisation. This will ensure 
that the relationship benefits both 
parties.
So in the first stage, managers are 
asked to ‘think strategically’ about the 
stakeholder relationship. This starts with 
identifying the organisation’s ‘strategic 
objectives’ - the critical targets for the 
entire company. For example, a retailer 
may aspire to have a store on every high 
street.

15
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsKrick and Forstater’s Framework - Stage 1 (cont.)
Understanding the company’s overall goals can help 
managers identify how the relationship might align with its 
broader strategy. This applies to managers at every level in 
the hierarchy, and both internal and external stakeholders.
Once they have a solid idea of the company’s priorities, 
managers can study how its stakeholders fit into this vision. 
This could include mapping stakeholders according to their 
power and interest in the company, as we saw in lesson 1.

16
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsKrick and Forstater’s Framework - Stage 2
In stage two, managers are asked to ‘analyse’ individual 
stakeholder needs and expectations, and ‘plan’ their 
engagement based on this information. This means carrying 
out some research to gauge stakeholder priorities.
This research will fall into one of two categories: primary or 
secondary.
Primary research, also known as ‘field’ research, requires 
the gathering of new data by the manager. This can be done 
by a variety of means - surveys and focus groups are two 
‘structured’ methods.

17
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsSurveys and Focus Groups
Surveys are a series of questions designed to identify trends or opinions 
across a population. They are therefore especially useful when dealing 
with stakeholder groups - employees, customers or the residents of a city, 
for example. Their advantage is that the data may be kept anonymous. 
This can help in situations where confidentiality is important, as with 
employee feedback.
Focus groups are small groups of people assembled to offer their 
views about a product, service, or proposed change. For example, an 
amusement park planning to expand might consult customers on the 
kinds of rides to include in the new location.
A focus group is typically made up of just 6 to 10 people. However, 
because it is interactive, the group can sometimes give a fuller idea of 
the feelings around an issue than a survey, which is limited by its static 
format.

18
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsNetworking
Surveys and focus groups are more formal ways of gathering data. 
But informal research can be useful as well.
Networking, for example, can produce information about 
stakeholders within a particular industry. For instance, the manager 
at a company that caters to lawyers may gather data on their 
preferences by attending a social event for legal professionals.

19
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsSecondary Research
It’s not always possible to get data first hand, however, and primary research may be expensive 
and time consuming. This is especially true when the information concerns major stakeholder 
trends. In these cases, it may be quicker and more affordable to do ‘secondary’ research.
Secondary, or ‘desk’ research involves collecting information that has been gathered and 
interpreted by others. This may be research done by other organisations, including businesses, 
non-profit groups and government agencies like the Office for National Statistics. Unlike 
primary research, secondary research can be carried out without any interaction with the 
stakeholder.

20
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsSetting Engagement Objectives
Both types of research can build profiles of 
stakeholders, which will then be used to set 
objectives for the engagement.
For example, the head of an animal shelter 
may discover that a local celebrity is a dog 
lover. This information will create a new 
goal for engagement with her: to persuade 
her to make a major gift to the shelter’s dog 
adoption fund.

21
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsSetting Engagement Objectives (cont.)
The objective is the core element of the engagement plan; the rest of the plan will cover the 
actual timing and method of engagement. So once managers understand the stakeholder’s 
priorities, and what they want out of the relationship, they can decide who will contact the 
stakeholder, how often and by what means.
If the organisation already has a relationship with the stakeholder, there will be a track record 
managers can study to see the current approach. They can then identify any gaps between this 
approach and the stakeholder’s current expectations, amending the plan if necessary.

22
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsKrick and Forstater’s Framework - Stage 3
So far we’ve looked at the first two stages of Krick and Forstater’s framework for engagement. 
These cover analysis of the organisation’s strategic objectives, and the needs and expectations 
of its stakeholders
The key is to find the place where these two elements overlap. The engagement approach can 
then take advantage of this alignment.

23
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsKrick and Forstater’s Framework - Stage 3 - Example
For example, let’s say a bicycle manufacturer has the strategic objective 
of selling more of its products to women. The Director of Marketing 
at the company has researched athletes whom it has sponsored in the 
past, and found one who is active in getting girls into the sport. The 
athlete wants to raise the profile of female cyclists, and the company 
wants to sell more bicycles to women: their priorities align.
The director will now respond by putting together a plan for 
engagement - a detailed proposal to recruit the cyclist as a company 
spokesperson.

24
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsKrick and Forstater’s Framework - Stage 3 (cont.)
However, a shift in strategy may require preparation before it can be 
applied in the real world. The organisation may need to ‘strengthen’ its 
‘capacities’ to engage stakeholders according to the new plan.
This happens in the third stage of Krick and Forstater’s framework.
For example, a business may implement training to develop customer 
service skills among its staff. To support such changes, it’s often 
necessary to adapt workplace policies; in this case, the company may 
resolve to become more transparent with customers, not just during 
service calls, but in all its customer relations. This will help embed the 
changes in its culture.

25
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsKrick and Forstater’s Framework - Stage 4
Stage four in the Krick and Forstater framework is the ‘design and 
engage’ phase; this is where all the research and planning is turned 
into action. The manager’s focus will now shift to the methods of 
engagement which best meet the objectives set out in the plan. This 
will require a good understanding of the communication tools at their 
disposal.
One way to group these is by their purpose - for example, by whether 
the manager needs to ‘convey’ information or to ‘exchange’ it.

26
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsOne and Two Way Communication
Presentations, webinars, newsletters and reports are key ways to convey information to 
stakeholders. They tend to be formal in nature, and although they may include a feedback 
option, like a questionnaire, they are largely forms of ‘one way communication.’ They are often 
used to inform multiple people at the same time.
Often, however, a manager will need to exchange information with stakeholders - this will 
require tools that make ‘two way communication’ easier. These include one to one or group 
meetings, social events, phone calls and emails. Although they vary in their formality, these 
methods are designed to get feedback from stakeholders, not just inform them.

27
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsStakeholder Status
In some cases, the aim of the engagement may be even higher 
- to make a decision or take collective action. So for example, a 
trade union may keep its members informed via newsletters and 
annual reports. But it will schedule meetings when they need to 
debate policy or come to a decision on whether to strike.
Engagement methods will also take into account the 
stakeholder’s status. The higher their level of power, the 
more personal and interactive the communication becomes. 
This reflects the different ‘levels’ of engagement, as set out 
by Friedman and Miles, which change as stakeholder power 
increases. So for example, a charity will keep its contributors 
updated on its activities via an email newsletter. But its major 
donors will be invited to private lunches, and opportunities to 
meet the beneficiaries of its work.

28
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsKrick and Forstater’s Framework - Stage 5
The fifth stage in the framework involves the review of 
interaction with stakeholders undertaken at stage 4. This final 
stage centres around three key activities: Act, Review, and 
Report.
The first of these - Act - refers to action the organisation takes 
as a result of engaging the stakeholder. For example, using their 
feedback to change the timelines on a project.
‘Review’ represents an evaluation of the whole engagement 
process, noting which methods worked well, where there is 
room for improvement and what form it should take.

29
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsKrick and Forstater’s Framework - Stage 5 (cont.)
Finally, ‘Report’ refers to ways the company may communicate the action to the stakeholder. 
This could literally be a report, but equally it could consist of meetings or email updates, 
depending on the company, project and stakeholder status.
Any lessons learned can then be used to update the engagement plan. This must be done on 
a regular basis because, as we saw earlier, stakeholder positions may change. By revisiting the 
process, organisations can ensure they keep up with the relationship as it develops.

30
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsInfluencing Stakeholders
It’s possible to maintain stakeholder relationships without a formal engagement plan - this is 
often the case with secondary and low power stakeholders.
However, as the stakeholder’s power rises and their involvement with the company increases, 
it becomes more important to ‘influence’ or persuade them to support the company’s 
objectives.
This is where frameworks like the Krick and Forstater model we saw earlier can be helpful.

31
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsInfluencing Stakeholders (cont.)
According to the CMI, ‘influencing’ is ‘the ability to form, shift or alter the opinions and 
behaviour of others’ - to bring them round to a way of thinking.
Influencing can take almost any form in practice - persuading a team to adopt a new handover 
method and convincing a major supplier to change contract terms are both forms of 
influencing.

32
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsEngagement Methods
The engagement methods used for these purposes can also vary widely, from one way 
communication tools, like speeches or newsletters, to more interactive ones, like meetings.
Presentations offer a useful way of engaging stakeholders and presenting important 
information. So, as a manager, it is important for you to be able to present effectively.
Download the ‘Presenting to Stakeholders’ information sheet in the lesson to explore a 
structured, seven-step approach. It emphasises understanding your audience, crafting 
compelling content and delivering your message with authenticity.
The difference between influencing and simply interacting with stakeholders, is that influencing 
has an underlying purpose - an objective driving the engagement. As we’ve seen earlier, this 
objective will be informed by company strategy, and the identity and needs of the stakeholder 
in question.

33
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsInfluencing and Engaging Stakeholders - Example
Let’s see how this might work in practice.
Marilyn is the Head of Development at a medium 
sized natural history museum in London. Her team 
is responsible for cultivating relationships with the 
institution’s key external stakeholders: museum 
members, and individual and corporate donors.

34
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsInfluencing and Engaging Stakeholders - Example (cont.)
Museum members belong to the ‘high interest, 
low power’ stakeholder group. Individually they 
don’t have much influence over the museum, but 
collectively their membership fees make up the 
foundation of its operating income.
Keeping them informed and engaged is therefore a 
priority for Marilyn’s team.

35
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsInfluencing and Engaging Stakeholders - Example (cont.)
While Marilyn will use the museum 
website and tube adverts to update 
Londoners about the museum’s work, 
members will get a glossy quarterly 
magazine, and special visiting hours to 
acknowledge their status.
By giving them regular updates and 
special perks, she hopes to maintain - 
and perhaps increase - their number of 
visits and level of funding.

36
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsInfluencing and Engaging Stakeholders - Example (cont.)
The museum’s donors, on the other hand, are smaller in 
number, but contribute significantly more to its budget. 
They may work on collaborative projects with the 
museum - for example, to fund renovations to its building. 
They may also sit on the Board of Trustees and meet the 
leadership regularly to guide the museum’s direction.
Donors are ‘high interest, high power’ stakeholders, so 
Marilyn will create a more detailed plan of engagement 
for them than she does for members.

37
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsInfluencing and Engaging Stakeholders - Example (cont.)
This will often start with secondary research into a donor’s net 
worth, their interests and commitments. Marilyn will use this 
research to build a profile of each donor, and devise the best 
way to engage them.
Maintaining these relationships takes both time and effort. 
While members might be happy with perks like special visiting 
hours, donors expect high level treatment from the museum 
in line with their large contribution. The museum offers this in 
the form of special access to its top staff and its collections.

38
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsInfluencing and Engaging Stakeholders - Example (cont.)
For example, Marilyn will schedule working lunches for 
donors with the museum’s leadership, where both sides 
can discuss long term strategy and future projects.
This exchange is beneficial for both parties: donors feel 
valued because their views have been considered, and 
museum leaders get a better sense of donor priorities, 
whilst drawing on their expertise.

39
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsInfluencing and Engaging Stakeholders - Example (cont.)
Marilyn’s team will also arrange events exclusively for 
donors, such as annual dinners and private tours of new 
exhibitions. Here they will mingle with the museum’s 
curators and other high level staff, giving Marilyn the 
chance to catch up with them individually, and pitch the 
museum’s new ideas in a low pressure setting. This is often 
a lead in to a formal pitch for funding, which will happen in 
a one to one meeting.
Although they differ depending on the stakeholder group, 
all of Marilyn’s engagement methods involve influencing. 
And in this case, their objectives are the same: to build 
loyalty, generate interest and secure commitments to 
future funding.

40
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsInfluencing and Engaging Stakeholders - Example (cont.)
You’ll notice that as the stakeholder’s status rises, Marilyn’s approach to engagement changes, 
from mostly one way, to mostly two way communication.
This is because high power stakeholders often expect a more personal and ‘collaborative’ 
approach from organisations. However, collaborative techniques may be useful with any 
stakeholder group in the right circumstances. We’ll look at how managers deploy these 
methods more closely in the next lesson.

41
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsRecap
In this lesson, you have learned about:
• How organisations engage stakeholders
• The role of the manager
• The benefits of creating an engagement plan

