1
Managing Stakeholder Relationships
Lesson 3Managing Stakeholder Relationships
Last updated: 30/10/24

2
Managing Stakeholder Relationships
Collaboration and Conflict
Using collaborative 
techniques to 
build stakeholder 
relationshipsHow to manage 
stakeholder conflict 
when it arises

3
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsCollaboration
As we saw in the first lesson, one of the benefits of working with stakeholders is the knowledge 
they bring to the organisation, either in the form of outside expertise or employee skills.
This knowledge can be used to ‘collaborate’ to solve problems or create new ideas and 
products that benefit both parties. You’ll recall that this is one of the higher levels of 
engagement set out by Friedman and Miles.

4
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsCollaboration (cont.)
For example, a university might collaborate with a pharmaceutical 
company to develop treatment for a new disease. And if the treatment 
is successful, hospital emergency teams will need to collaborate on 
how to deliver it safely to patients.
Collaboration also happens at a lower level, where the goal may simply 
be to gain feedback and engage stakeholders in a project more fully.
However, while more people can bring more ideas to address a 
problem, working together as a group can be a complex undertaking.
For example, some ideas in a group project may be given more time 
than others simply because they’ve come from a contributor with 
higher status. Or the group may dismiss ideas that don’t agree with 
the majority opinion.

5
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsBrainstorming
Due to these drawbacks, several practical techniques have evolved 
over time to channel the creativity of group members, and 
improve the collaborative process.
‘Brainstorming’ is one such popular method. Here, the participants 
- often members of the same work team - agree to voice as many 
ideas as possible without judgement, encouraging everyone to 
respond freely to an issue. Once all the responses have been 
collected, the group starts to evaluate the quality of the ideas. The 
point is to air a diversity of opinions so that more ‘safe’ ideas, or 
those of more dominant group members don’t hinder debate.
However, traditional brainstorming can easily become chaotic. 
It requires strong leadership, and a structure to keep the group 
focused and on track.

6
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsSix Thinking Hats
Psychologist Edward De Bono developed one such collaborative technique in the 1980s. His 
method is a form of brainstorming, but it imposes some discipline on the process by assessing 
the issue from six different perspectives. It’s known as the Six Thinking Hats approach, because 
each perspective is represented by a metaphorical ‘hat’ in a particular colour.
Together, the group examines the problem from each perspective and then switches ‘hats’ 
to look at it from a different angle, until all perspectives have been considered. It’s especially 
useful in collective decision making. 

7
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsWhite and Red Hats
The ‘white’ hat requires the group to use logic - drawing on 
factual evidence to examine the issue and propose solutions.
The ‘red’ hat compels members to listen to their intuition 
and express their emotions. These can be both positive and 
negative, and take into account how people outside the 
group might feel about the issue.

8
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsGreen and Yellow Hats
The ‘green’ hat demands creativity - to think ‘outside the box’ 
and search for alternative solutions.
The ‘yellow’ hat calls for optimism - here the participants are 
asked to focus purely on the positive outcomes of their plans.

9
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsBlack and Blue Hats
Conversely, during the ‘black’ hat phase the group members 
explore the difficulties of the situation, and the weaknesses 
of their ideas. They may debate contingencies for worse 
case scenarios.
The sixth and final hat is blue. This hat belongs to the group 
leader, who stays neutral and moderates the discussion. 
Because the leader stands apart from the process, their 
perspective remains the same throughout.

10
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsThe Goal of the Thinking Hats
The goal of the Thinking Hats approach is for everyone in the group to adopt a particular 
viewpoint, even if it is not their usual pattern of thinking. This can help them see all sides of an 
issue, without prejudging other approaches, or competing with one another.
Although it can be used by just two people, the method works best when a larger group needs 
to make a decision. A bigger group will likely generate more diverse opinions, and therefore 
more solutions.

11
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsThe Goal of the Thinking Hats (cont.)
So for example, the hospital team debating how to deliver a new treatment will benefit from 
the views of doctors, nurses, physical therapists and administrative staff. However, by asking 
them to examine the situation from all angles, it encourages empathy and cooperation rather 
than conflict.
The Six Thinking Hats is often applied to problem solving among teams - that is, with internal 
stakeholders. However, it’s also important to gather input from external stakeholders, 
especially when the organisation’s plans have the potential to negatively affect them.

12
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsCollaborating with Stakeholders
So far we’ve discussed collaboration as a method to encourage 
innovation and better decision making.
However, collaborative working is also a form of engagement; it 
may be used to develop stronger stakeholder relationships. This 
applies to both internal and external stakeholders.
For example, a manager making major changes to a team process 
will want to consult everyone on the team on how the changes 
should be implemented. This is one way to get the team’s ‘buy-
in’ to the new process.

13
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsCollaborating with Stakeholders (cont.)
With external stakeholders, buy-in is often sought when the 
organisation is planning a complex project.
For example, a council may ask local teenagers to collaborate on 
a new youth club. The council is not necessarily after the young 
people’s ‘expertise.’ But it will want their opinions, because they 
are the target users of the club. Asking them for feedback will 
cultivate their support, and make sure they are happy with the 
project’s eventual outcome.

14
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsExplaining Expected Outcomes
Collaboration in such cases will take the form of discussions with 
each stakeholder group, and where possible, all stakeholders 
together.
These discussions have two goals. The first is to explain the 
outcomes expected from the project, and exactly what it will 
deliver. This will help manage expectations among stakeholders. 
If stakeholder hopes for the project are unrealistic, they may feel 
disappointed as it unfolds, and stop supporting it. Or if they were 
hostile at the outset, they may never come around to backing it.

15
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsUnderstanding Stakeholder Priorities
The second goal is to understand what is important to 
stakeholders in the course of the project.
As we’ve seen, stakeholder ideas may improve the project’s 
outcome. Conversely, if the organisation neglects stakeholder 
opinion, their plans are much less likely to succeed.
This is especially true of primary stakeholders, or those with high 
levels of power.

16
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsConsidering a Wide Range of Views
However, as we noted earlier, it’s important to consider a 
wide range of views, because different stakeholders will have 
differing needs.
The council’s ambitions for the youth club may be quite 
different from what the young people using it would prefer to 
see. The opinions of parents, and tenants of the leisure centre 
where the club will be located may be different yet again. If all 
these expectations are understood early on, however, there’s a 
greater chance to reconcile them.
To guide such complex discussions, the manager in charge will 
need outstanding two way communication skills - they’ll have to 
be good listeners, as well as good presenters of information.

17
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsThe MoSCoW Model
It may also be helpful to use a formal framework. The MoSCoW 
model is one well-known collaborative approach that can help 
organisations clarify what stakeholders need and expect from 
a project.
MoSCoW is an acronym that stands for Must, Should, Could 
and Won’t - with the two o’s added to make it easier to 
pronounce. It was first developed by Dai Clegg of Oracle 
Consulting, to help managers ‘cut to the chase’ when assessing 
stakeholder needs.

18
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsMusts
To apply this method, managers first ask stakeholders which 
outcomes a project or plan must deliver.
The CMI describes ‘musts’ as essential outcomes - if these aren’t 
secured by the end of the project, it will have failed.
For instance, parents contemplating the new youth club may 
insist on adult supervision of their children at all times. The 
teenagers, on the other hand, may prioritise comfortable seating 
areas and space to practice sport.

19
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsShoulds
Next, stakeholders are asked about the outcomes and 
deliverables that the project should  provide.
These elements are important, but if the worst came to worst, 
they could be delivered at a later date. For the young people who 
will attend the centre this might be a projection screen to show 
films. Although high on the wish list, it could wait, as they could 
make use of other facilities in the meantime.

20
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsCoulds
Third, stakeholders are prompted to consider which outcomes 
could  be achieved.
The CMI describes these as ‘nice to have,’ but ones that could 
be shelved if the project’s timescales or resources come under 
pressure. For the youth club members those might include arts 
and crafts lessons. They’d like to see them offered eventually, 
but they are not high priority right now.

21
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsWon’ts
Finally, stakeholders are asked to agree on what the project 
won’t  deliver - at least this time. All parties might agree that 
there is no need to provide a tea and coffee station, or catering 
for the youth club.
The stakeholders’ answers to these questions can provide 
real clarity for the organisation, but also for the stakeholders 
themselves. The process forces them to consider what 
the project truly involves, and how it will change their 
circumstances. It’s also a way to air differences about the plan 
before they escalate into conflict.

22
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsConflict with Stakeholders
At its best, the process of collaboration can generate new ideas that improve how both 
organisations and their stakeholders operate.
However, even in the most balanced and cooperative of relationships there will be times when 
conflict arises. We touched on conflict between the organisation’s stakeholders in lesson 1 - 
you’ll recall that this kind of friction can lead to a ‘conflict of interest’ for a company as it tries 
to satisfy all parties.

23
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsConflict with Stakeholders (cont.)
A second type of conflict occurs when there is a difference between the interests of the 
organisation and the stakeholder. Such conflict is inevitable on occasion, and if handled early 
and well it can be the catalyst for positive change. For example, by letting a manager know that 
a workload is too high, it can spur better use of resources across a whole team.
However, if left unresolved, conflict may start to undermine the organisation’s goals. For this 
reason, it’s important for managers to try and resolve any emerging conflict before it escalates.
If the problem is discovered early, it may be possible to ‘negotiate’ a solution to it.

24
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsNegotiation
As we saw in the first lesson, negotiation is a dialogue aimed at 
reaching an agreement between two or more parties. It allows 
each side to present their arguments, and in turn to consider the 
arguments of the other side.
We’ve seen this idea applied to contract negotiations, where the 
goal is to protect each party’s interests. However, negotiation can 
also resolve the problems that occur when those interests collide.
Negotiation is typically informal, with the parties dealing with each 
other directly, though sometimes a trained negotiator may be hired.
If the stakeholder is a group, they will often choose a representative 
to negotiate on their behalf. In either case, the process requires 
both skill and well thought out tactics to be effective.

25
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsSuccessful Negotiation
In their book ‘Getting to Yes,’ negotiation experts Roger 
Fisher and William Ury devised four principles for successful 
negotiation. These make up the basis of their Interest-Based 
Relational Approach, or IBR.
The principles are:
• Separate people from problems
• Focus on interests rather than positions 
• Invent options for mutual gain
• Insist on using objective criteria

26
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsSuccessful Negotiation (cont.)
The idea behind the first principle - separate people from 
problems - is to keep the negotiation as free from emotion as 
possible. Negotiations in which feelings take over can quickly get 
personal; sticking to the issue at hand will keep the conversation 
on track.
The second principle - focus on interests rather than positions - is 
a reminder that underlying every party’s negotiating position are 
their specific interests.
Understanding what drives the other party can help a negotiator 
more effectively persuade them to change the position.

27
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsSuccessful Negotiation (cont.)
The point of the third principle - invent options for mutual gain - 
is to explore all ideas that may satisfy both parties, not just settle 
for the easiest solution. This may result in a creative compromise, 
like a trade, which could be the difference between success and 
failure.
Finally, the fourth principle, ‘insist on objective criteria,’ demands 
that the negotiating parties agree on the evidence they will use 
to guide their decisions. Negotiations can break down if the two 
sides bring up different sets of ‘facts’ to support their positions.
A better strategy is to agree which criteria will be used - for 
example, expert market analysis - and seek out the most objective 
sources of it. This means knowing the topic of negotiation well, 
and having the skill to assess the quality of the evidence.

28
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsSuccessful Negotiation - Example
For example, imagine the owner of a sporting goods shop, Rick, has 
been confronted by a regular supplier, who complains that his product 
- golf clubs - is being poorly displayed. Rick doesn’t want to move the 
clubs as they would replace his top selling items. But he also doesn’t 
want to lose the supplier, so he agrees to negotiate.
He soon discovers that the supplier is experiencing low sales across 
his product range. Rick realises that the supplier’s driving interest is 
rescuing his business, so he offers him a one month promotion - with 
large signage - in place of changing the display.

29
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsSuccessful Negotiation - Example (cont.)
He backs his offer with statistics from a retail association report 
showing a promotion can result in better sales than positioning 
in the store. The supplier agrees because he trusts the source 
of Rick’s data - and knows that in this scenario both parties will 
increase their sales.
The key to successful negotiation is to understand that it’s not 
a zero sum game; the point is not to ‘win’ at the expense of 
the other side. The solution should work for both parties, so 
the more insight a manager has into the stakeholder, the more 
successful it’s likely to be.

30
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsNegotiation and Influencing
Influencing and negotiation are essential skills for effective management and leadership, and 
should form a critical part of every leader’s toolkit.
They enable managers to build strong relationships with their teams, resolve conflicts, drive 
change, build consensus and motivate individuals towards shared goals.
By mastering these competencies, leaders can create a positive work environment, foster trust 
and inspire innovation, all while navigating the complexities of interpersonal dynamics. Read 
more about negotiation and influencing in this lesson’s associated information sheet.

31
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsWorkplace Conflict 
We’ve now looked at conflict between the organisation and its 
external stakeholders. However, conflict can also arise between 
the organisation and internal stakeholders - for example, 
employees.
Employees are a key stakeholder group for a company - without 
their work it would not exist. However, this group is made 
up of individuals with differing backgrounds, abilities and 
personalities. Such differences - and the needs and expectations 
they create - will sometimes be a source of conflict.

32
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsWorkplace Conflict (cont.)
As we saw earlier, a small dose of workplace conflict can 
be productive, because it provides the organisation with 
valuable information. Some employee grievances can 
uncover otherwise hidden problems, and with the help 
of management may lead to creative change.
However, prolonged, unresolved conflict can be very 
damaging for a company - especially if it ripples out 
beyond the individual, and affects the morale of a larger 
group of employees.

33
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsWorkplace Conflict (cont.)
Conflicts may involve practical issues like pay or working 
conditions, or touch on interpersonal issues like harassment.
But all must be handled with sensitivity by managers. 
Because employees have so much at stake in the company 
- and vice versa - a dispute with an employee can have a 
disproportionate impact on all parties.

34
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsApproaching Conflict
The Advisory, Conciliation and Arbitration Service, or ACAS, is a non-profit group which offers 
advice on workplace issues.
They recommend that managers first approach conflict by scheduling an informal chat with 
the individual or group in question. As ACAS points out, ‘giving people the time and space to 
express their feelings and concerns can often help to clear the air.’ This may sometimes be 
enough to defuse the situation, if the problem isn’t too serious.

35
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsConducting an Investigation
However, if conflict persists, or escalates further, managers may need 
to conduct an investigation.
At this point the manager will continue to listen to the stakeholder, 
but also consult with their colleagues, supervisors and the HR 
department. They will keep notes of any exchanges, and evidence 
that comes to light.
The idea is to get as full and objective a view of the problem as 
possible, so that both sides can agree a way forward. This may 
be accompanied by a structured negotiation, following a similar 
framework to the Fischer and Ury model we explored previously.

36
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsSeeking External Help
If no progress is made in negotiations, managers may find it useful to 
seek external help. Outside intervention can ease tension between the 
negotiating parties, and sometimes present the problem in a new light.
The most popular form of third party intervention is known as 
‘mediation.’ In this process, an independent, impartial person helps the 
two parties reach a solution that is acceptable to everyone. Although 
mediation may be used at any level of dispute, it’s often applied in 
more serious cases - such as those involving discrimination. It’s also a 
common tool in negotiations between management and its unionised 
workforce.
In these cases, the mediator will often be a trained professional. In less 
serious situations, a mediator can be any outside party with the skills 
to defuse emotion around the conflict, and get to its underlying causes.

37
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsArbitration
It’s important to note that mediation is not legally binding; the mediator gives advice but 
does not issue a judgment. However, it is possible for two parties to negotiate a legally 
binding resolution. This process is known as ‘arbitration.’
Unlike a mediator, an arbitrator will not meet in person with the two parties. They will 
look at evidence submitted in writing, and make a decision, or ‘award,’ based on this 
information. As the stakes for all parties are higher in a binding decision, arbitration is used 
only in serious disputes.

38
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsAlternative Dispute Resolution
The methods of conflict resolution we’ve described in this lesson fall under the umbrella of 
‘Alternative Dispute Resolution,’ or ADR. They’re so called because they are alternatives to the 
final resort for managing conflict: the court system.
Both ADR and the courts can be used to address internal or external disputes with 
stakeholders. However, it’s worthwhile to pursue ADR first, because it’s in everyone’s interest 
to avoid the time, expense and possible brand damage of a court case.
So, we’ve seen how different engagement techniques can impact on stakeholder relationships. 
In the next lesson we’ll examine the impact of engagement on the organisation’s performance, 
and learn how this impact is measured.

39
Managing Stakeholder RelationshipsRecap
In this lesson, you have learned about:
• Using collaborative techniques to build stakeholder relationships
• How to manage stakeholder conflict when it arises

