Exercise 1: Your Organisation’s Stakeholders
Stakeholder Engagement in My Organisation
Stakeholder engagement is a strategic and multi-layered process at Weston College, framed by the interests and power of each stakeholder group. I work closely with academic staff, an internal and High Interest – Low Impact group, curriculum managers (high interest – high impact, although this can be flexible depending on the project or task), and the Head of Digital Education (high interest – high impact). Externally, our stakeholders include awarding bodies, Jisc, Microsoft, employers, and regulatory bodies such as Ofsted, as well as service stakeholders like contractors and government agencies. While I may not have direct contact with all of these external stakeholders, my role as a Digital Coach puts me in the mix of internal engagement and supporting College-wide strategic relationships.
Engagement is delivered through structured communication (like one way and two way communications), collaborative projects, and feedback loops. Surveys and focus groups are used to gather insights from staff, particularly in shaping our approach to using Gen AI within wider College use, and with digital learning platforms and delivery models like the Brighter Futures Hub and Blended Learning. Newsletters, presentations and CPD events help maintain institutional transparency and alignment, but this tends to be methods chosen to deliver information via one way communication. The level of management interacting with stakeholders varies. Senior leaders engage with high-power stakeholders such as MPs, local counsillors, business owners, or awarding bodies. This might be through forums or strategic partnerships. Middle managers tend to handle contractual and service-level engagements with providers and professional services, while roles like mine focus on internal operations and pedagogical support for staff.
As a Digital Coach I contribute to the wider engagement strategy by taking strategic objectives and turning them into practice. I mentor staff, embed digital tools, and support curriculum innovation. These are activities that align with Krick and Forstater’s framework, particularly in strengthening engagement capabilities and designing processes. Examples of this exist in how I support the embedding of Microsoft tools, such as Teams, into teaching practice to meet expectations within the inspection frameworks and digital strategy. I will also run CPD sessions following an analysis of current needs to ensure staff are digitally confident and literate. Another example is where I build capabilities in delivering training, creating resources and toolkits to support the integration of digital tools in teaching and learning. I also contribute to feedback loops, helping review and refine engagement approaches based on stakeholder responses.
Weston College adopts a tiered approach to engagement so that it is both purposeful and appropriate. Friedman and Miles suggest that we align stakeholder power with appropriate communication methods so that we can foster reciprocal relationships that support long-term commitment and innovation. By following this strategy, Weston College can ensure that all stakeholders feel valued, while enabling the organisation to remain agile and responsive to changing needs.