 
How to Prepare a B riefin g Paper 
 
Introduction 
  Briefing pape rs are commonly  used by  manag ers in or ganisations as a way  to pr esent infor mation in 
a concise  and structur ed for mat. The y can be  used for  a varie ty of purpose s: 
  ●To pr ovide  a summar y of a par ticular ar ea or topic 
●To infor m a de cision-mak er about a topic or  issue  
●As a pe rsuasiv e docume nt, to ge t othe rs to ag ree on an issue  and he lp w
ith its re solution 
  
Key Elemen ts 
  
Briefing pape rs pre sent infor mation in a pr ofessional manne r that can quick ly and e ffective ly infor m 
the inte nded audie nce. As the  name  indicate s, briefing pape rs should be  brief. The  conte nt should 
be concise , clear, reliable  and e asy to follow. The y will se ldom e xceed two page s in le ngth. 
  
Planning 
  Before you start writing,  it’s essential to de termine  the ​
scope of the  pape r. This is important be cause  
it will allow you to be  clear about what y ou will and won’ t be covering, and the  level of de tail that  
you will g o into. Both the se will v ary base d on how much infor mation y ou're able  to find as we ll as 
how much information y ou'll ne ed to include  in orde r to suppor t the  obje ctive  of your pape r. 
  Next, it’s impor tant to conside r who will be  reading y our pape
r; your ​audience. You ne ed to think  
about what the y need to k now about the  subje ct are a and how much the y might k now alr eady. 
  
Structure 
  
Once  you have  covered the se first two planning stage s, you should star t to map out the  key points 
you want to mak e, bearing in mind that y ou ar e aiming for approximate ly 2 side s of A 4 in total,  
which e quate s to around 1, 000 wor ds. This me ans that y ou won’ t have  space  to inclu de any 
unne cessary information or  be long-winde d. 
 
While you may  see some  variations on str ucture , most br iefing pape rs will include  the following  
infor mation:  
  ●Name
: Identifie s who the  briefing pape r is inte nded for . 
●Date: The  date  of submission of the  briefing pape r. 
●Subject:  Here, the topic or  issue  of the  briefing pape r should be  described in a fe w words. ​It 
should ge t directly to the  matte r of the  issue . It’s impor tant to e nsure  you ge t your point acr oss 
without be ing too wor dy. 
●Summary sectio n: Some  briefing pape rs may include  thre e or four  key bulle t points to pr ovide  
an ‘at a glance ’ ove rview of its conte nt, but as the  ove rall le ngth is shor t, this is not alway s 
necessary. 
 
Unit 525 A ssignme nt 1 
 

 
●Backgro und informati on: This give s the  reader some  histor y and conte xt on the  topic or  issue . 
It’s very important that all the  details in this par t are factually  accurate  and re liable . 
●The purpose of the paper: Hav ing e stablishe d the  conte xt, this se ction should infor m ​the  reader 
of its inte ntion and inte nded outcome . 
●Main body: This se ction will pr esent an analy sis or  examination of the  topic  or issue , conside ring 
the conte xt and purpose  alre ady e stablishe d.  
-Mak e sure to do the  necessary research and back  up any  claims with e vidence. ​You  
can include  statistics and data whe re relevant but re membe r to k eep it factual;  keep 
opinions out,  so that it ​is as unbiase d as possible . 
 
-Depending on the  purpose  of the  pape r, this analy sis may  present the  pros and cons 
or ​str engths and we aknesses of curr ent against propose d busine ss pr actice s. 
Analysis might also include  the financial implications for  a par ticular cour se of 
action. 
 
-Remembe r to think  about y our audie nce and ​e xplain things in te rms that the y will be  
able  to quick ly and e asily  unde rstand​. This me ans avoiding jar gon and te chnical  
language  or infor mation that isn't of ce ntral conce rn. 
 
-Where relevant, it should also i dentify  any sensitive  aspe cts of the  topic or  issue  that 
may  negativ ely affe ct a pe rson or the  organisation.  
  ●Conclusion: This br ief closing se ction should clarify  why  this issue  should be  conside red 
important by y our reader. 
  ●Reco mmen ded Acti on: This will se t out the  next ste ps or  sugge sted cour se of action. U se the 
facts y ou have  laid out to show why  the solution you are  proposing is a good 
one ​. ​Remembe r 
that the  reader will be  the one  who mak es the  final de cision on this issue , not y ou. 
  Editing 
  
As you ar e aiming for a concise  docume nt, it is we ll worth spe nding time  to e dit y our briefing pape r. 
Remembe r, it should be  clear, easy to follow,  include  all ne cessary evidence and be  about two page s 
long.   
●If too long,  look  for place s to cut it down by  look ing for  any information t
hat is le ss 
important or  off-topic  
●Mak e sure there aren't k ey pieces of information missing  that ar e necessary to mak e your 
argume nt cle ar and convincing  
●Check the structur e, so that facts flow fr om the  issue  
●R​emove  any jargon or  technical languag e 
●Carr y out a final proofre ad to che ck spelling and gr ammar  
 
Unit 525 A ssignme nt 2 
 

