 Overview  of  assessment  tasks 
 Each  task  in  this  assessment  brief  has  been  developed  to  enable  you  to  evidence  achievement  of  the  learning 
 outcomes  and  Assessment  Criteria  for  CMI  HTQ  Unit  549:  Developing,  Managing  and  Leading  Teams.  Each  of 
 the  Assessment  Criteria  must  gain  a  pass  outcome  for  you  to  successfully  achieve  the  unit. 
 Preparation  for  the  assessment 
 ●  Please  read  the  CMI  HTQ  Unit  549  specification  thoroughly  as  only  the  content  related  to  the  achievement  of 
 the  Assessment  Criteria  will  be  assessed. 
 ●  Research  the  topics  being  assessed.  Suggested  reading/web  resources  are  provided  in  the  CMI  HTQ  Unit  549 
 specification.  Your  tutor  may  signpost  you  to  relevant  resources.  Additionally,  you  may  access  excellent  online 
 resources  at  ManagementDirect  https://members.md.cmi.org.uk 
 ●  Please  read  the  definitions  of  the  command  verbs  used  in  the  Assessment  Criteria  (for  example  evaluate, 
 discuss,  analyse)  at  https://www.managers.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Command-Verb-Definitions.pdf 
 Completing  the  assessment  brief 
 ●  The  assessment  brief  contains  a  series  of  tasks  which  are  clearly  referenced  to  the  relevant  Assessment  Criteria. 
 ●  Refer  to  the  Assessment  Guidance  Table  at  the  end  of  the  assessment  brief  which  outlines  the  requirements  for  a 
 Pass  or  Refer. 
 ●  Evidence  for  assessment  must  be  presented  in  the  Assessment  Booklet  or  other  suitable  format. 
 ●  If  work  based  evidence  is  used,  such  as  plans  or  documentation  (which  has  been  referred  to  within  the  main  text, 
 it  should  be  included  in  the  ‘Work  Based  Evidence’  section  in  the  Assessment  Booklet. 
 ●  Appendices  are  not  a  requirement  of  this  assessment  brief.  If  appendices  are  included  these  will  not  be  marked 
 or  moderated  by  CMI. 
 ●  Work  based  evidence,  where  included,  must  not  exceed  SIX  (6)  pages.  All  evidence  should  be  combined  within 
 the  Assessment  Booklet. 
 ●  Any  assessment  templates  that  have  been  created  to  support  this  unit  are  located  in  the  Assessment  Booklet. 
 ●  The  Assessment  Booklet  must  be  completed  in  a  professional  manner  (for  example  applying  business 
 conventions  for  writing  formal  reports)  and  by  using  Microsoft  Word,  Rich  Text  Format  or  another  compatible 
 software  programme. 
 ●  The  Assessment  Booklet  must  be  saved  as  a  word  document  (.doc  or  .docx)  and  not  in  a  PDF  format. 
 ●  An  appropriate  referencing  system  (such  as  Harvard  Referencing)  must  be  used  to  ensure  the  original  source(s) 
 of  quotations  or  models  can  be  verified.  Please  refer  to  Reference  and  Citations  Study  guide  at 
 https://www.managers.org.uk/~/media/Files/PDF/Study%20Support/References-and-Citations.pdf 
 ●  Finally,  you  must  complete  and  sign  the  Learner  Statement  of  Authenticity  (an  electronic  signature  is  accepted) 
 Learner  support 
 For  information  regarding  policies  and  procedures  for  assessment  (for  example  reasonable  adjustments,  learner 
 support,  appeals,  complaints,  certification,  confidentiality,  plagiarism)  you  should  contact  your  tutor  or  Centre 
 manager  and  refer  to  the  CMI  Level  5  Diploma  in  Operational  Management  syllabus. 
 CMI  HTQ  Unit  549  │Sept  2024 
 1 

 Assessment  brief  CMI  HTQ  Unit  549  has  been  designed  to  enable  learners  to  evidence  their  ability  to  develop, 
 manage  and  lead  a  high  performing  team.  The  assessment  focuses  on  the  theoretical  and  practical 
 approaches  to  developing,  leading,  and  managing  teams  as  well  as  the  knowledge,  skills  and  behaviours 
 required  to  evaluate  team  capabilities,  analyse  recruitment  processes,  staff  selection  and  learning  and 
 development  activities. 
 On  successful  completion  of  the  assessment  the  Operations  or  Departmental  Manager  will  appreciate  how 
 individuals  and  teams  can  be  supported,  motivated  and  inspired  to  exceed  expectations. 
 Assessment  brief  CMI  HTQ  Unit  549  features  the  following  assessment  tasks.  Further  detail  is  provided 
 against  each  assessment  task  within  the  brief. 
 Assessment  Task  Learning  outcomes 
 covered  by 
 assessment  method  Assessment  Criteria  L5 
 ODM 
 KSB  Guideline 
 word  count 
 1  Write  a  report  titled: 
 Approaches  to 
 developing, 
 managing  and 
 leading  different 
 teams  LO1  Understand 
 approaches  to 
 developing,  managing 
 and  leading  teams  1.1  Evaluate  the  use  of 
 leadership  styles  and 
 theoretical  models  for 
 developing,  managing  and 
 leading  teams  K1 
 K9 
 B3  Approx.  1500 
 words 
 1.2  Analyse  strategies  for 
 managing  team  leaders 
 1.3  Develop  approaches  to 
 respond  to  the  challenges  of 
 managing  and  leading  multiple 
 and  remote  teams 
 2  Write  a  briefing 
 paper  titled: 
 Methods  that  can  be 
 used  to  monitor, 
 manage  and 
 improve  individual 
 and  team 
 performance  LO2  Understand 
 approaches  to  achieving 
 a  balance  of  skills  and 
 experience  in  teams  2.1  Assess  the  factors  which 
 impact  on  the  selection  of 
 learning  and  development 
 activities  for  individuals  and 
 teams  K10 
 B3  Approx.  1500 
 words 
 2.2  Examine  the  use  of 
 coaching  and  mentoring  models 
 to  support  team  development 
 2.3  Analyse  motivational 
 techniques  used  to  create  high 
 performing  teams 
 3  Write  a  good 
 practice  guide 
 titled: 
 Approaches  to 
 achieving  a  balance 
 of  skills  and 
 experience  in  a  team  LO3  Know  techniques 
 for  leading  individuals 
 and  teams  to  achieve 
 success  3.1  Analyse  a  process  for 
 recruiting  team  members  K12 
 B3  Approx.  1000 
 words 
 3.2  Discuss  methods  used  to 
 monitor  and  manage  individual 
 and  team  performance 
 CMI  HTQ  Unit  549  │Sept  2024 
 2 
 4  Write  a  report  titled: 
 Skills  and 
 approaches  in 
 managing  talent  and 
 performance  LO4  Be  able  to  apply 
 your  skills  in  managing 
 talent  and  performance  4.1  Discuss  practical 
 approaches  for  effective  team 
 management  and  leadership  S9 
 S12 
 S18 
 B3 
 B5  Approx.  1500 
 words 
 4.2  Evaluate  techniques  for 
 assessing  current  and  future 
 team  capabilities  and 
 requirements 
 4.3  Evaluate  good  practices  for 
 enabling  and  supporting  high 
 performing  teams 
 Guideline  word  count 
 The  written  word,  whether  generated  and/or  recorded,  is  expected  to  form  the  majority  of  assessable  work 
 produced  by  Learners  at  Level  5.  The  amount  and  volume  of  written  work  for  this  unit  should  be  broadly 
 comparable  to  a  word  count  of  5500  words  within  a  margin  of  +/-10%.  The  unit  also  includes  additional  work  in  the 
 form  of  work  based  evidence.  Excessive  use  of  word  count  is  not  grounds  for  referral,  however,  the  CMI  reserves 
 the  right  to  return  work  to  the  Centre  for  editing  and  resubmission  by  the  Learner. 
 The  following  are  excluded  from  the  written  word  count:  Index  or  contents  pages,  headings  and  subheadings, 
 diagrams,  charts  and  graphs,  bibliography. 
 If  you  require  further  guidance  on  assessment,  please  ask  your  centre  to  refer  to  CMI's  Quality  Assurance 
 Handbook. 
 CMI  HTQ  Unit  549  │Sept  2024 
 3 
 Understanding  approaches  to  developing,  managing  and  leading  teams  is  an  essential  management  skill. 
 Operational  or  departmental  managers  must  have  a  thorough  understanding  of  theoretical  models  for 
 developing,  managing  and  leading  teams  to  be  effective  in  their  role.  This  needs  to  be  complemented  by  the 
 ability  to  practically  apply  theoretical  approaches  in  the  workplace,  specifically  when  managing  team  leaders 
 and  multiple  and  remote  teams. 
 Write  a  report  titled:  ‘Approaches  to  developing,  managing  and  leading  different  types  of  teams’ 
 The  report  should  be  in  4  (FOUR)  parts: 
 1.  Evaluate  the  use  of  different  leadership  styles  for  developing,  managing  and  leading  teams  (AC1.1) 
 2.  Evaluate  different  Models  used  to  develop,  manage  and  lead  teams  AC1.1) 
 3.  Analyse  strategies  for  managing  team  leaders  (AC1.2) 
 4.  Develop  approaches  to  address  the  challenges  of  managing  and  leading  multiple  and  remote 
 teams  (AC1.3) 
 Guidance  for  completion  of  Task  1 
 ●  Your  report  should  be  a  structured  document  communicated  or  presented  in  a  written  form.  It  should 
 be  organised  in  a  narrative,  graphic  or  tabular  form  and  refer  to  a  specific  activity,  project,  situation, 
 period  of  time,  event  or  topic. 
 ●  It  is  recommended  that  all  CMI  Assessment  Criteria  for  this  task  are  clearly  addressed  within  the  main 
 body,  conclusion  and  recommendations  sections  of  your  report.  It  is  also  good  practice  to  indicate 
 where  the  Assessment  Criteria  have  been  addressed. 
 ●  Your  report  should  include  appropriate  sub  headings  to  organise  the  content.  You  may  choose  to 
 include  tables  and  diagrams  (as  appropriate,  but  avoid  over-reliance  on  these  visual  aids))  to  support 
 your  discussion.  Ensure  all  tables  and  diagrams  are  clearly  labelled  and  indicate  their  sources. 
 ●  Your  discussion  should  be  underpinned  with  relevant  theoretical  principles  and  references  to  relevant 
 models  and  frameworks. 
 ●  You  may  use  well-chosen  work-based  examples  from  your  own  organisation  or  an  organisation  you 
 have  researched  and  are  familiar  with. 
 ●  Please  refer  to  the  indicative  content  for  the  Assessment  Criteria  (AC)  outlined  in  the  unit  specification. 
 ●  Word  limit  will  be  1500  words  (+/-  10%  at  the  Learners  discretion)  excluding  tables,  graphs,  figures, 
 references  and  annexes. 
 CMI  HTQ  Unit  549  │Sept  2024 
 4 
 Organisational  success  is  realised  when  teams  achieve  their  objectives.  This  assessment  task  has  been 
 written  to  enable  operational  or  departmental  managers  to  evidence  their  understanding  of  how  to  evaluate 
 team  capabilities,  the  recruitment  processes  for  achieving  a  balanced  team,  and  the  learning  and 
 development  activities  (including  coaching  and  mentoring)  which  support  team  success. 
 Write  a  briefing  paper  titled:  ‘  Methods  that  can  be  used  to  monitor,  manage  and  improve  individual  and  team 
 performance’ 
 The  briefing  paper  should  be  in  4  (FOUR)  parts: 
 1.  An  outline  of  the  factors  that  impact  on  the  selection  of  learning  and  development  activities  for 
 individuals  (AC2.1) 
 2.  Assessment  of  the  impact  of  the  factors  on  the  selection  of  learning  and  development  activities  for 
 teams  (AC2.1) 
 3.  Examine  the  use  of  coaching  and  mentoring  models  to  support  team  development  (AC2.2) 
 4.  Analyse  motivational  techniques  that  can  be  used  to  create  high  performing  teams  (AC2.3) 
 Guidance  for  completion  of  Task  2 
 ●  Your  briefing  paper  should  summarise  the  facts  pertaining  to  a  particular  issue  or  problem,  and  should 
 include  a  suggested  course  of  action. 
 ●  Your  briefing  paper  should  include  appropriate  sub  headings  to  organise  the  content.  You  may 
 choose  to  include  tables  and  diagrams  (as  appropriate,  but  avoid  over-reliance  on  these  visual  aids)) 
 that  can  be  included  to  support  your  discussion.  Ensure  all  tables  and  diagrams  are  clearly  labelled 
 and  indicate  their  sources. 
 ●  Your  discussion  should  be  underpinned  with  relevant  theoretical  principles  and  references  to  relevant 
 models  and  frameworks. 
 ●  You  may  use  well-chosen  work-based  examples  from  your  own  organisation  or  an  organisation  you 
 have  researched  and  are  familiar  with. 
 ●  Please  refer  to  the  indicative  content  for  the  Assessment  Criteria  (AC)  outlined  in  the  unit  specification. 
 ●  Word  limit  will  be  1500  words  (+/-  10%  at  the  Learners  discretion)  excluding  tables,  graphs,  figures, 
 references  and  annexes. 
 CMI  HTQ  Unit  549  │Sept  2024 
 5 
 The  ability  to  develop  a  high  performing  team  is  an  aspiration  that  can  be  achieved  if  the  foundation  for 
 monitoring  and  managing  individual  and  team  performance  is  in  place. 
 This  assessment  task  will  enable  operational  or  departmental  managers  to  discuss  methods  for  monitoring 
 and  managing  team  performance  and  evidence  how  good  practice  approaches  and  motivational  techniques 
 can  be  used  to  optimise  team  performance. 
 Write  a  good  practice  guide  titled:  ‘  Approaches  to  achieving  a  balance  of  skills  and  experience  in  a  team’ 
 The  good  practice  guide  should  be  in  2  (TWO)  parts: 
 1.  Analyse  the  processes  used  to  recruit  team  members  (AC3.1) 
 2.  Discuss  methods  used  to  monitor  and  manage  individual  and  team  performance  (AC3.2) 
 Guidance  for  completion  of  Task  3 
 ●  Your  good  practice  guide  should  be  a  structured  document  that  is  produced  with  the  purpose  of 
 supporting  individuals  to  develop  their  practice  in  a  particular  area  or  topic. 
 ●  Your  good  practice  guide  should  include  appropriate  sub  headings  to  organise  the  content.  You  may 
 choose  to  include  tables  and  diagrams  (as  appropriate,  but  avoid  over-reliance  on  these  visual  aids)) 
 that  can  be  included  to  support  your  discussion.  Ensure  all  tables  and  diagrams  are  clearly  labelled 
 and  indicate  their  source 
 ●  Your  discussion  should  be  underpinned  with  relevant  theoretical  principles  and  references  to  relevant 
 models  and  frameworks. 
 ●  You  may  use  well-chosen  work-based  examples  from  your  own  organisation  or  an  organisation  you 
 have  researched  and  are  familiar  with. 
 ●  Please  refer  to  the  indicative  content  for  the  Assessment  Criteria  (AC)  outlined  in  the  unit  specification. 
 ●  Word  limit  will  be  1000  words  (+/-  10%  at  the  Learners  discretion)  excluding  tables,  graphs,  figures, 
 references  and  annexes. 
 CMI  HTQ  Unit  549  │Sept  2024 
 6 
 The  ability  to  lead  individuals  and  teams  to  success  is  arguably  the  most  important  skill  an  operational  or 
 departmental  manager  can  possess. 
 Write  a  report  titled:  ‘  Skills  and  approaches  in  managing  talent  and  performance’ 
 Your  report  should  be  based  on  the  approaches  used  within  your  own  organisation  or  an  organisation  that  you 
 have  researched  and  are  familiar  with.  (Work  based  examples  can  be  used  to  demonstrate  competence  in  your 
 skills.) 
 The  report  should  be  in  3  (THREE)  parts. 
 1.  Discuss  practical  approaches  used  for  effective  team  management  and  leadership  (AC4.1) 
 2.  Outline  the  skills  and  techniques  required  to  meet  current  and  future  needs  and  evaluate 
 techniques  for  assessing  these  within  a  team  (AC4.2) 
 3.  Evaluate  good  practice  used  to  enable  and  support  high  performing  teams  (A4.3) 
 Guidance  for  completion  of  Task  4 
 ●  Your  report  should  be  a  structured  document  communicated  or  presented  in  written  form.  It  should  be 
 organised  in  a  narrative,  graphic  or  tabular  form  and  refer  to  a  specific  period,  event  or  topic. 
 ●  It  is  recommended  that  all  CMI  Assessment  Criteria  for  this  task  are  clearly  addressed  within  the  main 
 body,  conclusion  and  recommendations  sections  of  your  report.  It  is  also  good  practice  to  indicate 
 where  the  Assessment  Criteria  have  been  addressed. 
 ●  Your  report  should  include  appropriate  sub  headings  to  organise  the  content.  You  may  choose  to 
 include  tables  and  diagrams  (as  appropriate,  but  avoid  over-reliance  on  these  visual  aids))  that  can  be 
 included  to  support  your  discussion.  Ensure  all  tables  and  diagrams  are  clearly  labelled  and  indicate 
 their  sources. 
 ●  Your  discussion  should  be  underpinned  with  relevant  theoretical  principles  and  references  to  relevant 
 models  and  frameworks. 
 ●  You  may  use  well-chosen  work-based  examples  from  your  own  organisation  or  an  organisation  you 
 have  researched  and  familiar  with.. 
 ●  Please  refer  to  the  indicative  content  for  the  Assessment  Criteria  (AC)  outlined  in  the  unit  specification. 
 ●  Word  limit  will  be  1500  words  (+/-  10%  at  the  Learners  discretion)  excluding  tables,  graphs,  figures, 
 references  and  annexes. 
 CMI  HTQ  Unit  549  │Sept  2024 
 7 
 Refer  Pass 
 ●  Not  all  Assessment  Criteria  have  been  met 
 ●  No  examples  were  used  or  the  examples  given 
 do  not  match  the  requirements  of  the 
 Assessment  Criteria 
 ●  Evidence  is  - 
 ●  Unclear 
 ●  Technically  incorrect  or  inaccurate 
 ●  Biassed 
 ●  Includes  unprofessional  language 
 ●  Poorly  structured  and  presented 
 ●  Lacks  sufficient  detail  to  show 
 understanding  of  the  topic 
 ●  The  application  of  different  theories  or 
 approaches  is  incorrect,  unclear  or 
 inappropriate 
 ●  Evidence  is  not  directly  attributable  to  the 
 learner 
 ●  Evidence  of  plagiarism,  collusion,  cheating 
 ●  External  sources  of  information  are  not 
 acknowledged 
 ●  Work  based  evidence  does  not  meet  the 
 requirements  of  the  Assessment  Criteria  and 
 the  occupational  standard,  and  are  current 
 (within  the  period  of  the  technical  education  or 
 apprenticeship  programme)  ●  All  Assessment  Criteria  have  been  met 
 ●  Examples  given  are  well  chosen  and  match  the 
 requirements  of  the  Assessment  Criteria 
 ●  Evidence  is  - 
 ●  Well  written  and  presented 
 ●  Contains  a  breadth  of  examples 
 ●  Accurate 
 ●  Current 
 ●  Authentic 
 ●  Inclusive 
 ●  Coherent 
 ●  Credible 
 ●  Technically  correct 
 ●  Evidence  shows  understanding  of  different 
 theories  or  approaches,  is  clear  and 
 appropriate 
 ●  Evidence  used  from  external  sources  has  been 
 correctly  cited  and  referenced 
 ●  Evidence  is  directly  attributable  to  the  learner 
 ●  Work  based  evidence  does  meet  the 
 requirements  of  the  Assessment  Criteria  and 
 the  occupational  standard,  and  are  current 
 (within  the  period  of  the  technical  education  or 
 apprenticeship  programme) 
 CMI  HTQ  Unit  549  │Sept  2024 
 8 
