URL: https://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/stakeholder-engagement-practical-guide

Stakeholder engagement: a practical guide | Leadership | The Guardian
Skip to main content
Skip to navigation
Skip to navigation
Print subscriptions
Newsletters
Sign in
US
US edition
UK edition
Australia edition
Europe edition
International edition
The Guardian - Back to home
The Guardian
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Show more
Hide expanded menu
News
View all News
US news
US politics
World news
Climate crisis
Middle East
Ukraine
US immigration
Soccer
Business
Environment
Tech
Science
Newsletters
Wellness
Opinion
View all Opinion
The Guardian view
Columnists
Letters
Opinion videos
Cartoons
Sport
View all Sport
Soccer
NFL
Tennis
MLB
MLS
NBA
WNBA
NHL
F1
Golf
Culture
View all Culture
Film
Books
Music
Art & design
TV & radio
Stage
Classical
Games
Lifestyle
View all Lifestyle
The Filter
Wellness
Fashion
Food
Recipes
Love & sex
Home & garden
Health & fitness
Family
Travel
Money
Search input
google-search
Search
Support us
Print subscriptions
Newsletters
Download the app
Search jobs
Digital Archive
Guardian Licensing
Live events
About Us
The Guardian app
Video
Podcasts
Pictures
Inside the Guardian
Guardian Weekly
Crosswords
Wordiply
Corrections
Tips
Search input
google-search
Search
Search jobs
Digital Archive
Guardian Licensing
Live events
About Us
Nestlé is trying to find solutions for a more sustainable cocoa value chain, as part of its efforts to improve stakeholder engagement.  Photograph: Chris North/PA
Nestlé is trying to find solutions for a more sustainable cocoa value chain, as part of its efforts to improve stakeholder engagement.  Photograph: Chris North/PA
Leadership
This article is more than
12 years old
Stakeholder engagement: a practical guide
This article is more than 12 years old
Engaging with stakeholders needn't be tricky for those willing to take a practical, issues-based approach
Petra Kuenkel
Wed 10 Apr 2013 05.21 EDT
Share
Discovering the needs and benefits of collaboration with stakeholders can be a painful experience for companies. Anticipating the potential in stakeholder dialogues at an early stage and following a step-by-step guide can lead to successful
shared value
creation.
The trend towards cross-sector collaboration and stakeholder dialogues is clear. Management strategists around the world are wondering whether we are moving towards a
convergence of values
and asking whether
shared value
creation (expanding the total pool of social and economic value) will become the norm? So, how can stakeholders
be engaged
to make CSR meaningful? The underlying idea is that partnerships between businesses and other sectors can drive sustainable development.
Visionary companies are tapping into these trends and understand the interdependence between societal and company performance on the global scale. The recently awakened have noticed that stakeholder cooperation can improve business performance. Even the late adapters realise that not keeping good relationships with stakeholders can have a damaging effect, not just on reputation but also on actual project results.
However, to many companies the nagging question remains: is there a formula to make stakeholder dialogues a fruitful experience, rather than opening Pandora's box? There can be misunderstandings and pitfalls in stakeholder engagement and we need to filter out what works and what does not.
In my experience, there is a set of common shortcomings in the private sector when it comes to external stakeholder engagement. Firstly, there is a lack of skills. Stakeholder engagement requires a new set of skills within companies to engage with the world beyond. Understanding the perspective of external stakeholders is not something taught in leadership development programmes. Companies tend to lack strategy. They do not consider stakeholder engagement as part of day to day operations in their core business. They subsequently delegate it to the CSR or communications department, under-utilising its tremendous potential or even risking damages to their reputation.
Many companies also suffer from a lack of focus when engaging stakeholders, failing to define when and why and what for. A CSR manager from a large German bank recently told me: "I do not know where to start – we have so many stakeholders!" While a retailer who organised a stakeholder dialogue with 150 guests, ended up with a long list of recommendations that could not be implemented. Stakeholders are often involved inappropriately, without focus and without the adequate processes.
But there is an increasing tendency for companies to do what good governments already do: become better by engaging their stakeholders. Coca Cola, for example, is trying by taking a collective action approach to rising water challenges,
Nestlé
is wrestling to find solutions for a more sustainable cocoa value chain and
Kraft Foods
supports African Cashew farmers. Stakeholder engagement can work and create shared value.
Defining a practical approach
At the
Collective Leadership Institute
we have found that, apart from understanding the stakeholder landscape in general, companies' stakeholder engagement needs to be:
1. issue-based;
2. pro-active instead of reactive;
3. learning orientated in order to get to tangible issue-based results;
4. measurable in terms of a company's internal targets; and
5. based on a thorough methodology.
Depending on the issue, a company needs to define whether stakeholder engagement is consultative (where the final decision on how to move on lies with the company) or cooperative (where the company is prepared to take joint action). An issue can also start with a consultation and then become a cooperation project.
Companies need to distinguish company-specific stakeholder engagement ("we engage with 'our' stakeholder") from sector-wide stakeholder engagement ("in order to have an impact on an issue we have joined an initiative – for sustainable coffee, living wages in Asia, African cashew processing – and this benefits the issue AND our core business").
Why engage?
Companies need to understand why they are engaging. Good reasons include:
1. Risk management: "if we don't do it, we can't operate". For an example of this consider Shell in Nigeria or BP in Indonesia.
2. Sustainability compliance management: "If we don't do it, we won't be successful". This could be applied to sustainable
coffee sourcing
at Nestlé as well as to
supply chain engagement
at Adidas, amongst others.
3. Market development: "If we do it, we can access new markets". This is the approach taken by Danone with its
base of the pyramid
model.
4. Innovation: "If we do it, we will be up to speed with our products", although in practice there are few examples of this.
5. Strategy: "If we want to grow, we have to do it and it will not only save us money, but make us better". Again, there are very few companies engaging for strategic purposes, although Unilever has made some strides.
I am convinced that high quality stakeholder engagement can serve the world and business.
Petra Kuenkel is founder and director of the
Collective Leadership Institute
This content is brought to you by
Guardian Professional
. Become a
GSB member
to get more stories like this direct to your inbox
Explore more on these topics
Leadership
Strategy
blogposts
Share
Reuse this content
Comments
(
…
)
Sign in
or
create your Guardian account
to join the discussion
Most viewed
Most viewed
News
Opinion
Sport
Culture
Lifestyle
Original reporting and incisive analysis, direct from the Guardian every morning
Sign up for our email
About us
Help
Complaints & corrections
Contact us
Tip us off
SecureDrop
Privacy policy
Cookie policy
Tax strategy
Terms & conditions
All topics
All writers
Newsletters
Digital newspaper archive
Bluesky
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Threads
TikTok
YouTube
Advertise with us
Guardian Labs
Search jobs
Work for us
Accessibility settings
Back to top
©
2025
Guardian News & Media Limited or its affiliated companies. All rights reserved.
(dcr)