URL: https://web.archive.org/web/20190712181520/http:/www.unep.fr/shared/publications/pdf/webx0115xpa-sehandbooken.pdf

VOLUME 2
Forwards
By AccountAbility:
Thomas Krick
Maya Forstater
Philip Monaghan
Maria Sillanpää 
With contributions from:
Cornis van der Lugt (United Nations Environment Programme)
Katharine Partridge, Charles Jackson, Asaf Zohar (Stakeholder Research Associates)
Acknowledgements:
The authors are grateful to the members of the review panel, who oversaw the development of this handbook:
Abra Brynne (International Social and Environmental Accreditation and Labelling (ISEAL) Alliance),  
Ambreen Waheed (Responsible Business Initiative Pakistan), Claus Frier (Novozymes), David Kingma (British American Tobacco),
David Shandler (Commonground), Ed Freeman (Olsson Center for Applied Ethics, University of Virginia),
Esther Trujillo Gimenez (Telefónica), Eva Beresford (The Environment Council UK), Gavin Andersson (Keystone),  
Harriet Eisner (Amicus Union), Ivar Oellingrath (Norsk Hydro), Jayanti Durai & Anne Pattberg (The Camelot Group),
Jayn Harding (FTSE4Good), Kavita Prakash-Mani (SustainAbility), Lucianne Verweij (Philips),  
Marina Liborakina (Uniﬁed Energy Systems of Russia), Nathalie Ledrich (Services Industriels de Geneve),  
Oliver Greenﬁeld (Worldwide Fund for Nature), Peter Croal (Southern African Institute for Environmental Assessment),  
Sean Ansett (Gap Inc.), Stacey Smith (Business for Social Responsibility)
Victor Tharage (Department of Environmental Affairs and Tourism in South Africa)
Many other people and organisations contributed to the development of this handbook, for a full list please see the appendix.
First Edition October 2005
ISBN 1 901693 220
Copyright 2005: AccountAbility, United Nations Environment Programme, Stakeholder Research Associates Canada Inc.
This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part and in any form for educational or non-proﬁt purposes without special permission 
from the copyright holders, provided acknowledgment of the source is made. No use of this publication may be made for resale or for 
any other commercial purpose whatsoever without prior permission in writing from the copyright holders. Designations employed and 
the presentation of material in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNEP concerning 
the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its frontiers or boundaries. Moreover, the views expressed do not necessarily 
represent the decision or the stated policy of UNEP nor does citing of trade names or commercial processes constitute endorsement. 
PDF versions of this report are available at: www.accountability.org.uk, www.StakeholderResearch.com, www.uneptie.orgTHE STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT MANUAL
VOLUME 2: THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
AccountAbility,  the United Nations Environment Programme, and Stakeholder Research AssociatesThe Stakeholder Engagement M anualF r o m  W o r d s  t o  A c t i o n
Forewords
Foreword by AccountAbility
Finding a path towards sustainable 
development will require the pooling 
of diverse perspectives, knowledge 
and resources. No single individual, 
organisation, nor even a single 
segment of global society is likely to 
by themselves identify and implement 
the solutions to the big challenges 
humanity is facing today. 
So, for each individual player, but 
also for society as a whole, there is at 
the same time a necessity for and an 
opportunity in engaging with each 
other to solve these problems.
However, we should also not forget 
another reason for considering and 
listening to each other before taking 
signiﬁcant decisions: We all share this 
world and the consequences of many 
of our actions are not limited to our 
own ‘backyards’. They impact others, 
too, whether it be directly or indirectly. 
This is why there also needs to be an 
acknowledgement that those who are 
impacted by an organisation’s activities 
have the right to be heard. 
All the above are reasons why 
encouraging eﬀective stakeholder 
engagement is core to AccountAbility’s 
mission of promoting organisational 
accountability for sustainable 
development. For the past decade 
we have worked with pioneering 
organisations and a growing band of 
professionals in developing standards 
and best practice in integrating 
stakeholder viewpoints into decision-
making. One outcome of these 
eﬀorts is the recent publication of 
the exposure draft of the AA1000 
Stakeholder Engagement Standard. 
Another complimentary output, this 
time produced in co-operation with the United Nations Environment 
Programme and Stakeholder Research 
Associates, is this handbook.
One aim of this handbook is to provide 
guidance on how corporations can 
increase their knowledge, their abilities 
and their legitimacy by undertaking 
stakeholder engagement. This will 
enhance performance and enable 
corporations to reach more ambitious 
objectives for their own business, but 
also allow them to contribute towards 
a more sustainable world. In fact, 
helping to identify the space of synergy 
between these two beneﬁts by aligning 
corporate strategy with sustainable 
development is the ultimate objective 
of this handbook.
We would like to thank the United 
Nations Environment Programme for 
initiating this project. We also thank 
Stakeholder Research Associates, 
whose work for Volume 1 of the 
manual provided an excellent starting 
point for the further research and 
development activities that led to 
the publication of this handbook. 
Furthermore, we would like to thank 
the members of the review panel and 
the multitude of other individuals 
who took part in the interviews, 
consultations and workshops for 
their contributions to this handbook. 
Finally, we are indebted to the 
publication sponsors who have not 
only contributed resources, but also a 
wealth of experience and expertise to 
this handbook.   
May it be of beneﬁt. 
Maria Sillanpää
Managing Director, AccountAbilityForeword by the United Nations 
Environment Programme
What does a rail infrastructure 
company do if it needs to build a 
new railway line through an area 
where local inhabitants may have 
to move as a result? What does a 
telecommunications company do if 
the setting up of a new mast opposite 
a local school causes community 
protest? How does a food and drinks 
company recover from the reputational 
damage caused by the discovery of 
health threatening substances in one 
of its products? How does a chemicals 
company ensure the neighbouring 
community is aware of potential 
hazards, risks and safety measures 
applied at a local production plant? 
How does a mining company restore 
employee morale after an underground 
explosion in which fellow workers lost 
their lives?
These are just a few examples of 
diﬃcult issues various companies have 
had to deal with, issues that display the 
close interplay between the business 
interest and the societal interest. These 
are basic examples of dramatic events, 
often showing symptoms of upstream 
planning and decision-making that 
had severe shortcomings. The more 
important question therefore becomes: 
How can the pro-active company 
engage its stakeholders strategically? 
Does it know who its real stakeholders 
are? If yes, how can it improve its 
ability to listen to and work with those 
stakeholders in deﬁning its mission, 
what it stands for, what it produces, 
how it produc es, and how it takes 
responsibility for its impacts with a 
long term perspective?
This Practitioner’s Handbook on 
Stakeholder Engagement  takes the 
company through some basic steps 
and considerations in planning and 
developing stakeholder engagement. 
As the second volume in the 
Stakeholder Engagement Manual 
by UNEP , AccountAbility and 
Stakeholder Research Associates, 
it builds on Volume 1 which gave a 
compilation of diﬀerent perspectives 
of companies, industry associations, 
labour unions and NGOs on 
stakeholder engagement. Both 
of the volumes conﬁrm growing 
recognition of the importance of 
stakeholder engagement in promoting 
environmentally and socially 
responsible behaviour by companies 
across all sectors. 
The origin of this Stakeholder 
Engagement Manual goes back to 
UNEP’s 19th Annual Consultative 
Meeting with Industry Associations 
and related stakeholder organisations 
in 2002. From discussions at that 
meeting and subsequent feedback 
in the development of this manual, 
it has been evident that stakeholder 
engagement can be extremely valuable 
to organisations of all kinds, in all parts 
of the world.
I thank AccountAbility, Stakeholder 
Research Associates, all participants 
and interviewees who contributed to 
the production of this second volume. 
Let us use it and get to work.
Monique Barbut
Director , UNEP Division  of 
Technology, Industry and EconomicsForewords by Stakeholder  
Research Asso ciates
We believe that stakeholder 
engagement is fundamental to 
successful business in the 21st century. 
Value creation for everyone involved 
in enterprise is essential to creating 
common purpose and addressing the 
complex issues facing the planet.
This handbook  follows on research 
presented in Volume 1:  The Guide 
to Practitioners’ Perspectives 
on Stakeholder Engagement. 
Practitioners told us that progressive 
businesses increasingly are aware 
of the interconnections between 
environment, social and economic 
issues and that they cannot act 
alone to ﬁnd solutions. Stakeholder 
engagement, they said, is rapidly 
emerging as a vital tool to develop an 
understanding of what sustainability 
means for companies and how it 
can add value and viability to their 
operations. 
Underpinning that notion, companies 
recognize that to be eﬀective, engaging 
stakeholders must be elevated from 
a risk-management tool to a deep-
seated element of corporate strategic 
planning.  This highlights the 
importance of engaging with internal 
stakeholders – employees at head oﬃce 
and in regional operations, labour 
unions, and management – to establish 
common ground and capabilities to 
eﬀectively engage.  
The research for Volume 1 also 
underlined the notion that 
stakeholders’ perspectives and 
preferred modes of engagement vary 
widely – across stakeholder group, 
issue, geography, culture, etc. This 
suggests that  stakeholder engagement is as multi-faceted as the issues it is 
meant to address. So, we learned, 
engagement is most successful when it 
is an iterative process that builds on the 
input of the stakeholders themselves. 
This Handbook  provides a valuable 
step-by-step guide through 
the processes of engaging with 
stakeholders. We encourage all 
corporations interested in creating 
value for their organisation – whether 
they are launching an engagement 
programme or wish to enhance an 
existing one – to make it a part of 
their everyday operations, while 
remembering that the goal is to embed 
engagement processes in their strategic 
decisions by building on dialogue and 
collaboration with their stakeholders. 
Our thanks to UNEP for initiating 
this important project and to our 
colleagues at AccountAbility for 
leading on the Handbook . 
Katharine Partridge
Charles Jackson
Asaf Zohar
Lara Korba
David Wheeler
Stakeholder Research AssociatesForewords
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 3
Introduction        5
Opening note       5
Why engage       8
What is in this handbook      10
How to use the handbook      12
Principles and standards for stakeholder engagement   14
Process summary       17
Think strategically about engagement     21
P1: Mapping your stakeholders     2 4
P2: Setting strategic objectives for engagement    26
P3: Identifying issues      35
P4: Prioritising stakeholders and issues    40
Take time to analyse and plan the engagement   49
P5: Reviewing your progress      52
P6: Learning from others and identifying potential partners  56
P7: Assessing your current engagements and drafting  
    stakeholder speciﬁc objectives     59
P8: Understanding and learning about stakeholders and their  
    representatives      65
P9: Checking for resource commitments and deﬁning  
   “margins of movement”      71
P10:  Creating an issue focused plan for stakeholder engagement  75
Maintain and strengthen the capacities needed to engage  
eﬀectively        79
P11: Strengthening your company’s ability to respond   81
P12: Developing the internal skills and characteristics needed  
     for stakeholder engagement     86
P13: Consider your stakeholders’ requirements for engagement  91
Engage with your stakeholders in ways that work    93
P14: Identifying the most eﬀective engagement methods   96
Common Stakeholder Engagement Approache s   100
P15: Designing the engagement process    1 10
Take action and review the engagement     1 19
P16: Creating a plan for action     1 21 
P17: Reporting back and giving assurance to your stakeholders  1 24
P18: Reviewing the engagement process    1 32
Jargon buster       135
Further resources       137
Bibliography       138
Further acknowledements      142WELCOME
STAGE 1
STAGE 2
STAGE 3
STAGE 4
STAGE 5
ANNEXContents
The Stakeholder Engagement 
Manual, consisting of this 
“Practitioner’s Handbook on 
Stakeholder Engagement” and 
its sister volume: “The Guide 
to Practitioners’ Perspectives 
on Stakeholder Engagement ” 
(Stakeholder Research Associates) 
are the result of UNEP’s interest 
in producing a best practice guide 
to stakeholder engagement, with 
the broader aim of promoting the 
use of stakeholder engagement 
worldwide as a way of advancing 
sustainable development goals.Welcome to this handbook, which 
provides practical guidance, advice 
and signposts for further information 
to those interested in how to make 
stakeholder engagement more eﬀective 
and beneﬁcial for the organisation 
and its stakeholders. Whilst Volume 
1,  "The Guide to Practitioners' 
Perspectives", provides engagement 
practitioners with an overview of the 
perspective of various stakeholders 
on stakeholder engagement, this 
Practitioner’s Handbook – Volume 2 
of the manual – is aimed primarily at 
corporate practitioners. In addition, 
large portions of this Handbook may 
also be of use to practitioners from 
any other type (i.e. non-business) 
of organisation. The hope is that a 
wide spectrum of users can take it 
up and adapt its recommendations 
to their own circumstances. As with 
all research projects of potentially 
widespread applicability, the initiative 
for The Stakeholder Engagement 
Manual grew from a simple 
proposition. Participants in UNEP’s 
Annual Consultative Meeting with 
Industry Associations, of October 
2002, requested guidance on how 
to engage in meaningful dialogue 
with stakeholders. UNEP began its 
exploration by surveying nearly two 
dozen leading corporations in order 
to understand the main engagement 
approaches they used and the major 
constraints they faced. This research 
revealed that the issues at stake 
diﬀer across stakeholder groups and 
highlighted the need to understand 
stakeholder engagement from multiple 
perspectives, including those of non-
governmental organisations, labour 
unions and trade associations. This sparked a series of additional research 
interviews with an international 
selection of senior representatives from 
various organisations, which formed 
the basis for Volume 1.  OPENING NOTE    
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 5Introduction
Background to Volume 2:  
The Practitioner’s Handbook on 
Stakeholder EngagementAs research on Volume 1 progressed, 
it became clear that corporate 
practitioners – whether already fully 
engaged or just beginning to explore 
the value of engagement – were 
looking for very practical guidance. 
This is the purpose of this handbook. 
It builds on the fundamentals 
summarized in Volume 1 (see below), 
as well as on further research and 
interviews, which were undertaken 
speciﬁcally for the handbook. An 
initial outline was subjected to a 
series of international consultations 
in Japan, the UK, South Africa 
and the United States, and speciﬁc 
parts were discussed in two one-day 
workshops with corporations and 
multiple stakeholders, which took 
place in London in April 2005. An 
international multi-stakeholder 
review panel (see inside cover), 
which was formed speciﬁcally for the 
development of this handbook, also 
made a signiﬁcant contribution to it 
not only by reviewing existing drafts, 
but also by adding much of their own 
knowledge and insights. Finally, the 
handbook also draws on the insights 
gained from a broad variety of other 
stakeholder engagement focused 
projects and initiatives undertaken 
or joined by AccountAbility in the 
past years. These projects include 
the Multi-Fiber Agreement (MFA) 
Forum, a multi-stakeholder initiative 
that seeks to ﬁnd ways of mitigating 
the negative social eﬀects caused by 
the end of a system of trade quotas 
on textiles, the Global Leadership 
Network, an initiative that explores 
the relationship between stakeholder 
engagement and corporate strategy, 
and of course the development of the AA1000 Series, including the 
AA1000 Assurance and Stakeholder 
Engagement Standards, which 
themselves have been developed and 
agreed upon in multi-stakeholder 
processes.
The result, we hope, will help 
corporate practitioners in roles 
that involve interaction and 
communication with stakeholders; 
speciﬁcally practitioners that want 
to adopt a more strategic approach 
to their engagement activities. Such 
practitioners may reside within a 
Corporate Responsibility team but 
also other departments such as Risk 
Management, Corporate Aﬀairs or 
Human Resources, and could be 
located either at headquarters or in a 
particular end-market, business unit or 
subsidiary. It is targeted at companies 
of any size, yet smaller companies can 
skip sections where they ﬁnd detail less 
relevant to their situations. Companies 
who are just beginning to engage 
will ﬁnd guidance on how to start 
approaching stakeholder engagement, 
whilst those who are already engaging 
with their stakeholders will also ﬁnd 
it useful for identifying possibilities 
for improvement and/or further 
systematisation. We also hope the 
handbook will be of use to consultants 
advising business people in this area, 
as well as to non-corporate actors who 
want to gain a deeper understanding of 
the corporate approach to stakeholder 
engagement. OPENING NOTEIntroduction
Background to Volume 1: 
The Guide to Practitioners’ 
Perspectives on Stakeholder 
EngagementVolume 1 complements the handbook 
by summarising and providing 
an overview of perspectives on 
stakeholder engagement from the 
point of view of a range of diﬀerent 
stakeholder groups. In doing this, The 
Guide to Practitioners’ Perspectives 
provides valuable information on the 
speciﬁc perspectives of individual 
stakeholder groups, but also more 
generally applicable advice which can 
be distilled from their experiences. 
Unlike Volume 2, the target group 
for the Guide on Practitioners’ 
Perspectives is not only corporate users 
but also practitioners from the whole 
spectrum of stakeholders.
Volume 1 reﬂects the perspectives of 
practitioners from:
•  Businesses – international 
corporations operating in 12 
sectors (mining, metals, oil and 
gas, electricity, construction, 
pharmaceuticals, water, 
telecommunications, consumer 
products, ﬁnance, automobile, and 
food) and having home operations 
located on ﬁve continents.
•  Non-governmental organisations 
– representing environmental, 
consumer, health, equity and 
governance concerns. 
•  Labour organisations – representing 
national and international bodies in 
15 countries on six continents.
•  T rade and industry associations 
– covering 10 sectors (mining and 
metals, iron and steel, oil and gas, 
water, chemicals, air transport, 
rail transport, food and beverages, 
cement and accounting).As for Volume 2 , the practitioners 
interviewed for Volume 1 have been 
candid in sharing their experience 
of engaging with stakeholders: what 
their motivations were, what tools and 
outside expertise they drew on, what 
worked and what did not, and what 
general advice they would distil from 
their own speciﬁc experiences  
for others. 
The aim of the two-part Stakeholder 
Engagement Manual by UNEP , 
AccountAbility and Stakeholder 
Research Associates is not to replace 
existing frameworks or re-invent 
the wheel. Rather the aim is to 
complement them by providing 
practitioners’ perspectives and 
practical guidance that build on and 
further develop the key frameworks 
that companies are already using.  
We hope that together these volumes 
will contribute to the changing 
mindsets on stakeholder engagement, 
away from mistrust and towards 
mutual beneﬁt. Comments from 
all interested parties are welcome 
at thomas@accountability.org.uk, 
kpartridge@StakeholderResearch.
com, and cornis.lugt@unep.fr.
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 7
The past few decades have seen a shift in the role of the corporation in society.  
Some of the key trends causing this are the globalisation of markets, the emergence 
of global social and environmental challenges like HIV / Aids and climate change, 
as well as the decreased ability of individual national governments to address such 
issues by themselves. Furthermore, there is the growing inﬂuence of civil society 
organisations. One outcome of these trends is an increase in the complexity 
and dynamics of the operating environment for all kinds of organisations, 
including businesses. In order to understand and address the issues emerging out 
of this dynamic complexity, individual actors, whether businesses, civil society 
organisations or governments, are becoming increasingly dependent on sharing 
knowledge and working together. 
In this changing environment, businesses now play a more important role than ever 
before. Their activities have economic, environmental and social impacts on society 
from a local through to a global scale. In many countries, businesses play an active 
part in the shaping of public policy and regulatory developments. Furthermore, a 
wave of privatisation in many parts of the world, and a growing number of public-
private partnerships has increased the role of the private sector in delivering what 
has traditionally been seen as public services. The increased involvement of private 
corporations in international development activities, often in co-operation with 
inter- and supranational bodies, is another signiﬁcant development in this context. 
In response to the enhanced role of business in society, more and more members 
or representatives of diﬀerent social groups who are impacted, claim their right to 
be informed of, consulted on and involved in corporate decision-making. In many 
developed countries, these claims have been  enshrined in legislation, which requires 
consultation before taking potential high-impact decisions, for example on the 
location of an industrial production plant.WHY ENGAGE?
3rd Generation
Integrated strategic 
engagement for sustainable 
competetiveness
2nd Generation
Systematic engagement for risk 
manag ement and increased under standing 
of stakehold ers
1st Generation
Pressure driven engagement for pain alleviation  
with localised beneﬁtsIntroduction
1 See also the complementary Figure 2.6 in Volume 1 “The Guide to Practitioners’ Perspectives on Stakeholder Engagement”, p.27.THREE GENERATIONS OF CORPORATE 
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  1 
Consequently, many corporations have come to regard engagement with a variety 
of individuals and entities on social, environmental and economic issues as an 
important aspect of how they manage their activities. However the ﬁrst steps in 
stakeholder engagement (1st Generation) were often driven by external pressures, 
undertaken in an ad-hoc manner and limited to issues that provoked conﬂict with 
stakeholders. Many businesses, realising the beneﬁts of a more proactive, broad 
and ongoing dialogue, then started to develop more sophisticated and systematic 
approaches to stakeholder engagement. These 2nd Generation stakeholder 
engagement activities have proven to increase understanding, manage risks and solve 
conﬂicts more eﬀectively. 
Today, leading companies have started to develop an appreciation that stakeholder 
engagement can contribute to learning and innovation in products and processes, 
and enhance the sustainability of strategic decisions within and outside of the 
company. This 3rd generation stakeholder engagement enables companies to 
align social, environmental and economic performance with core strategy. Such 
stakeholder engagement processes involve a pooling of resources (e.g. know-how, 
ﬁnancial, human or operational resources) that can help all parties involved to gain 
insights, solve problems, and reach goals that none of them could reach alone.
Despite the obvious challenges of stakeholder engagement, the outcomes of best 
possible practice in stakeholder engagement clearly justify the necessary eﬀorts. 
Successful stakeholder engagement not only helps companies to secure leadership in 
an increasingly complex and ever changing business environment, but will also help 
to bring about systemic change towards sustainable development.
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 9 Effective and strategically aligned stakeholder engagement can:
–  Lead to more equitable and sustainable social development by giving those who have a  
 right  to be heard the opportunity to be considered in decision-making processes;
–  Enable better management of risk and reputation;
–  Allow for the pooling of resources (knowledge, people, money and technology) to solve  
 problems and reach objectives that cannot be reached by single organisations;
–  Enable understanding of the complex business environment, including market   
 developments and identiﬁcation of new strategic opportunities;
–  Enable corporations to learn from stakeholders, resulting in product and process   
 improvements;
–  Inform, educate and inﬂuence stakeholders and the business environment to improve their  
 decision-making and actions that impact on the company and on society; 
–  Build trust between a company and its stakeholders;The Beneﬁts of Stakeholder Engagement
THIS HANDBOOK PRESENTS STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  
IN FIVE STAGES: 
-  The ﬁrst Stage is an overall consideration of strategic business objectives, how  
 these relate to stakeholders and speciﬁc issues, and how you can undertake an  
 initial prioritisation of stakeholders and issues for further analysis. 
-  The second Stage introduces diﬀerent levels of engagement, and guides  you   
 in analysing your existing relationships, available resources and organisational   
 constraints. It also helps you to learn more about speciﬁc  stakeholder’s   
 representatives, and to decide on what kind of relationship you want to develop  
 with these stakeholders. 
-  The third Stage addresses questions of internal and external competencies and  
 capacities to engage, and provides guidance on how you can ensure that all parties  
 to an engagement are able to join and take part in it eﬀectively. 
-  The fourth Stage outlines diﬀerent engagement techniques, and – building  
 on the previous steps – helps you to design an approach that suits the needs of  
 your speciﬁc situation and helps you to reach your objectives. 
-  Finally, in the ﬁfth Stage, this handbook will provide you with guidance on how 
to   follow up on the outputs of engagement, and how to ensure that your  
  stakeholders feel assured regarding the quality of your eﬀorts. 
For the sake of clarity and ease of use, the handbook presents stakeholder 
engagement as a process consisting of discrete stages. The stages represent groups 
of necessary questions and processes in planning and managing stakeholder 
engagement, but will not always be best covered in such a strict sequence. It may well 
be necessary to carry out several of the described activities at the same time, or to 
return to ‘previous’ steps in order to clarify or reconsider.
The process for stakeholder engagement presented here is underpinned by the 
principles of materiality, completeness and responsiveness. The relevance of these 
principles in the individual stages is described in each chapter. They are further 
outlined later in this introduction, on p 15.
The handbook includes a number of tables, tools and templates which users can 
apply to their own context.  
These can be downloaded from  www.accountability.org.uk . 
Each chapter consists of:
- Purpose:  An outline of the objectives and rationale for undertaking this Stage.
- Principles:  An explanation of how this Stage relates to the principles of   
 materiality, completeness and responsiveness.
- Process:  Practical guidance for each of the key processes, decisions and actions  
 involved at this Stage.
- Practical examples:  Organisational policies and experiences and ﬁrst hand  
 comments from practitioners. WHAT IS IN THIS HANDBOOK?                      Introduction
FIVE STAGE STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT FRAMEWORK
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 11
Forwards
THROUGHOUT THE HANDBOOK, THE FOLLOWING ICONS 
IDENTIFY DIFFERENT RESOURCES:
Background Information:  
explaining the ideas, processes and terms used at each Stage.
Tools and Resources:  
which provide a framework for applying these concepts to your own 
organisation.
Real-life Examples:
case studies and comments from practitioners. 
Suggested Methodologies:  
for undertaking the individual steps of stakeholder engagement, and 
guidance in applying the tools laid out in this handbook.
Important Things to Consider: 
to consider regarding the process or methodologies.
Summary Templates:
that help to capture the outputs of the different steps in the engagement 
process. These templates are merely suggestions, and you may want to 
adapt them to your needs by adding or modifying individual elements,  
or by simplifying them. They can be downloaded in Microsoft word or  
Excel-format from  www.accountability.or g.ukHOW TO USE THE HANDBOOKIntroduction
THE ANNEXES  INCLUDE :
-   Jargon buster: A glossary of terms used in the handbook and others that you  
 might come across.
-    A list of further resources, publications and sources of expertise.
THE ACCOMPANYING WEBSITE INCLUDES:
-   Printable copies of each section 
-   Printable and modiﬁable copies of the blank templates used in the handbook.
Additional resources relating to speciﬁc industries or approaches, as well as updates 
to the handbook, may be made available for download in the future.
If you wish to be kept informed of developments or additions to the 
handbook, please send an email with “Subscribe to SE Handbook 
Updates” in the subject line to service-enquiries@accountability.org.uk. 
We would also appreciate if you could enclose some feedback, information 
on your organisation and the purpose you intend to use this handbook for!
HOW TO USE THE HANDBOOK
This handbook is designed both to be used for a whole organisation or for  
individual projects or processes. You can adapt it to your individual, project speciﬁc 
or organisational needs, by adding additional pages or selecting particular parts to 
draw on. The templates and tools that can be downloaded from the website www.
accountability.org.uk are modiﬁable, too.
The structure of the handbook outlined above provides guidance around most  
major decisions that you will have to make when considering and undertaking 
stakeholder engagement. However, in some cases your requirements may be much 
less extensive, and it may be better served by consulting just one or two stages of  
the handbook, or only some of the tools oﬀered in them.
Remember that the stages presented in this handbook represent necessary questions 
and processes in managing stakeholder engagement, but not a strict cycle of 
engagement that must always be followed sequentially before you can start  
engaging with stakeholders. It may well be necessary to carry out several of the 
described activities at the same time, or to return to ‘previous’ steps in order to  
clarify or reconsider.
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 13
PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS FOR STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
There are a range of frameworks, standards and codes, which organisations can 
draw on to provide guidance for the process of stakeholder engagement and which 
aim to improve the sustainability performance of the organisation. These include 
the GRI Sustainability Reporting Guidelines (on reporting), SA8000 (on labour 
standards compliance), the AA1000 Series (on systematic accountability, including 
engagement), and the EFQM Excellence Model (on quality management). At 
the national level various bodies have issued guidance and standards on social 
responsibility, for example the SD21000 in France, SIGMA in the UK, AS8003 
in Australia and Standard SI 10000 in Israel. At an international level, these will be 
complemented by the current ISO process to develop international guidance on 
social responsibility, in which stakeholder engagement will feature prominently. 
There are also a number of useful resources from organisations including The World 
Business Council for Sustainable Development, Business for Social Responsibility, 
CSR Europe, The Future 500 Initiative, the UK Environment Council, the South 
African Calabash Project, the Brazilian Instituto Ethos, the Indian Development 
Alternatives Group and the International Association for Public Participation. Such 
sources of guidance are highlighted throughout the handbook, wherever relevant 
and also in the resource list in Annex 1.
The achievement of procedural quality in stakeholder engagement does not 
necessarily translate to a connection with the company’s core business activities or 
material issues. While many standards, frameworks and sources of practical guidance 
(including those from the ﬁelds of public and civil society participation) can help to 
measure and achieve such procedural quality, many of them provide less guidance on 
identifying and addressing the speciﬁc, important issues for each individual business. 
The AA1000 Series, especially the AA1000 Stakeholder Engagement Standard 
Exposure Draft provides guidance in how to use stakeholder engagement to deal 
with issues of material signiﬁcance to the business and its stakeholders, and how to 
align stakeholder engagement with an organisation’s core strategy. Therefore it is 
used as the framework for this handbook.
The AA1000 2  Series  guides organisations in establishing systematic accountability 
processes that involve stakeholders in the generation of strategies, policies and 
programmes as well as associated indicators, targets and communication systems, 
which eﬀectively guide decisions, activities and overall organisational performance.
The AA1000 Framework is organised around the overarching principle of 
‘inclusivity ’. 
“Striving for inclusivity means that an organisation is committed to reﬂect, at all 
stages of a process, the views and needs of all Stakeholder groups. Stakeholder views 
are obtained through an engagement process that allows them to be expressed 
without fear or restriction. Inclusivity requires the consideration of  ‘voiceless’ 
stakeholders including future generations and the environment”.
2 The A11000 Series includes the AA1000 Assurance Standard, as well as the AA1000 Stakeholder Engagement Standard.  
    Stakeholder engagement is central to all components of the AA1000 series.Introduction
Inclusivity can be achieved by adherence to the following three principles:
Materiality :  
requires knowing what concerns and is important to you and your stakeholders.
Completeness :  
requires understanding and management of material impacts and associated 
stakeholder views, needs, and performance perceptions and expectations.
Responsiveness :  
requires coherently responding to stakeholders' and the organisation's material 
issues.
These principles are not unique to the AA1000 Series and will need to be integrated 
with your own language and existing frameworks. For example, Altria developed 
their stakeholder engagement process on the basis of these principles, but deﬁned 
their own principles for stakeholder engagement under the headings involvement, 
candor, relevance, learning and action. The Global Reporting Initiative’s 
Sustainability Reporting Guidelines also use the principle of “inclusiveness” as a key 
one in forming the framework of a sustainability report, referring to the systematic 
engagement of stakeholders in sustainability report development and improvement. 
The GRI deﬁnes the principle of “completeness” diﬀerently, applied in the context 
of reporting, to refer to the scope (in terms of time, issues and organisational entities 
covered) of what is included in a report. This can again be linked with the above-
listed principles applied in the context of stakeholder engagement, namely the 
challenge to engage with stakeholders on an agenda that is clearly demarcated in 
terms of time frame, issues and operational entities covered.The Accountability Commitment
'Inclusivity'
Principles"acknowledging stakeholders right to be heard, and accounting for one's actions to stakeholders"
Hear that means: The organisation identiﬁes and addresses the most signiﬁcant impacts related to 
it's business operations and the stratergy, as well as the stakeholders that organisation identiﬁes and 
sddresses the stakeholders with signiﬁcant potential to inﬂuence the organisation.Responsiveness Completeness Materiality
"Demonstraiting adequate 
response""Understanding your impact 
& what people think of you""Knowing what is important  
to you and stakeholders "THE ACCOUNTABILITY COMMITMENT AND PRINCIPLES
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 15
Materiality
Completeness
ResponsivenessThink Strategically Analyse and Plan Strengthen Capacities Engage with Stakeholders Act and ReviewIn the context of this manual, these three principles are understood to relate to the 
key questions that people (both inside and outside of the organisation) will ask you 
when considering your relationships and engagement with stakeholders:
- Firstly “Is it genuine?”   Are you just going through the motions of consultation  
 for public relations purposes, or are you serious about getting a complete and  
 balanced picture of your organisation’s material impacts?
- Secondly “Is it fair and well informed?”   Does the process of engagement allow  
 all stakeholders to be considered or are signiﬁcantly impacted stakeholders  
 ignored? Are internal and external processes in place that enable the organisation  
 to gain a good understanding of its impacts and what its stakeholders think of it?
- And ﬁnally “What diﬀerence does it make?”  What are you going to do about the  
 issues raised, how does this impact on other aspects of your performance, and  
 how does it beneﬁt your business? Are you willing to make the changes that  
 are required to integrate possibly new issues into your management processes  
 and strategy? Also: In which way does this beneﬁt your business? 
The handbook will guide you through an approach to stakeholder engagement that 
stands ﬁrm when assessed against these questions. Whilst each of the three principles 
applies at each Stage, they have particular relevance at diﬀerent points in the overall 
process. The dark cells in the table below indicate which principle is most important 
in each Stage. At the beginning of each chapter there is also an interpretation of these 
principles as they apply to that Stage. Introduction
PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS FOR STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
Stakeholder Engagement StageTHE RELEVANCE OF MATERIALITY, COMPLETENESS AND RESPONSIVENESS TO THE FIVE STAGES 
OF STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
Dominant 
PrincipleStage
• Stakeholder map (p25)Look at all the stakeholders and issues that affect or are affected by your 
organisation (or policy decision/project/site business unit etc.)  
 Work out who the stakeholders are. 
 Identify and consider strategic engagement risks, opportunities 
 and objectives.   
 
 Identify your strategic objectives, the underlying issues and how  
 important they seem to different stakeholder groups. Prioritise.This Stage is crucial to ensuring the identiﬁcation of material issues and stakeholders : 
 Have you identiﬁed which issues and stakeholders appear to be most important for  
 long-term success and sustainability?To identify the strategic priorities for stakeholder engagement in your organisation. STAGE 1
Think Strategically
Aim
Principles
Key Steps Methodology
& TemplateTools and Resources
• Beneﬁts of eng agement (p9, p30)
• 5-part ma teriality test (p35)
• 4 stages of issue maturity  (p41)
• Stakeholder inﬂuence a nd dependency 
   matrix  (p43)M2 - T2 (p34)M1 - T1 (p25)
M3 - T3 (p38)
M4 - T4(p46)• Changing d rivers of engagement (p29)
This Stage is crucial to developing your understanding of the materiality of issues and 
stakeholders and to allow for completeness in addressing them : 
 Do you understand the issues and stakeholders enough to design an enagement process  
 that really adresses stakeholder expectations and robust?To build up a basis of knowledge about the organisation and its stakeholders in order to 
prioritise further and develop a plan for engagement.
Increase your understanding of the potentially material issues and 
stakeholders identiﬁed as strategic priorities in Stage 1.
• Organisational learning stages  (p52)
M6M5 - T5 (p55)
M7
M8 - T8 (p69)Review how these issues are currently manage d within your 
organisation.
Draw on learning from other organisations and networks about how 
best to respond to these issues.
Review the current state of your relationships with these stakeholders.
Build up a proﬁle of your stakeholders - their expectations, inﬂuence, 
characteristics and preferred approaches to engagement.
Consider what the organisation is and is not able to do in relation to 
these issues and expectations.
Develop a strategic engagement plan which lays out which groups of 
stakeholders you need to engage with, at what level and what you hope 
to achieve.• Issue / Response Matrix  (p53)
• Links into Learning Networ ks (p59)
• Further Resources (Annex)
• Levels of Engagement  (p60)
• Stakeholder Proﬁle - Key Issues  (p66)
M9 - T9 (p74)
M10 - T10
(p76)STAGE 2
Analyse and Plan
Aim
Principles
Key Steps Methodology
& TemplateTools and ResourcesPROCESS SUMMARY
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 17
 Engage with your stakeholders. Decide the best way to engage with your stakeholders. • Levels of engagement  (p87)Set up  the process of engagement itself :
 Design and pre pare for the  engagement process.• Common stakeholder                   
 engagement approaches  (p109)M14
M15 - T15
(p116)
(Speciﬁc 
engagement 
method 
decided 
in M14)• Questions for selecting                  
   engagement methods  (p88)
• Practical issues checklist  (p110)
• Guidance on when to use  
    a facilitator  (p112)This Stage is crucial to ensuring materiality, completeness and responsiveness: 
 Does the engage ment processes meet the needs of both organisation and it's  
      stakeholders?To plan and effectively carry out engagement activities with stakeholders.STAGE 4
Design the Process and Engage w ith Stakeholders
Aim
Principles
Key Steps Methodology
& TemplateTools and ResourcesIntroduction
PROCESS SUMMARY
This Stage is crucial to ensuring that your organisation is able to understand (completeness) 
and respond (responsiveness) in a coherent manner: 
 Does your organisation have the capacity to understand the issues, engage effectively   
 and act on that engagement?
 Develop and carry out plan to stren gthen the capaci ties needed to  
 engage effectively. Con sider the capacities and practical issues of your stakeholders  
 and identify ways to address the se. Con sider the individual skills and c apacities needed for   
 engagement and identify areas for improvement. Con sider the strength of your organisational sys tems and  
 identify ga ps. • Organisational learning stages  (p52)Look at your own organisation as well as your Stakeholders :
• Stakeholder Engagement              
   skills and ch aracteristics map  (p87)
• Obstacles to participation  (p91)M12-T12(p89)M11-T11(p85)
M13
M11, M12, M13,
T11(p85)
T12(p89)• Strengthening enablers  (p82)To develop the individual skills and organisational s ysytems needed to engage effectively 
with stakeholders.STAGE 3
Strengthen Capacities for Engagement
Aim
Principles
Key Steps Methodology
& TemplateTools and Resources
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 19 Put learning into action. Review the process itself to improve futu re manage ment. Report back to stakeholders. Develop a plan of action. • SMART Targets  (p122)Looking at the results of the engagement process :
• AA1000  Assurance St andard              
   Checklist (p128)
• Thinking about a ssurance  (p131)M17M16 - T16
M18 - T18
(p133)
M16, M17, M18• Impacts of reporting framework  (p126)To translate new learning, insights and ag reements into action.STAGE 5
Act, Review and Report
Aim
Principles
Key Steps Methodology
& TemplateTools and ResourcesThis Stage is crucial to ensuring that you respond adequately (responsiveness) and  
for validating your understanding of the materiality of issues:  
 Are you able to respond to, and learn from stakeholders' concerns and opinions?
Deﬁne overall scope
The process outlined in this handbook can be 
applied at a number of levels. Specify how you 
intend to use it in this instance:
    To cover the entire company
   To focus on a single business line  
   (or business unit or department): 
   To focus on a speciﬁc program, initiative  
    or product:
Secure overall organisational commitment  
to stakeholder engagement at this level. 
You need to have basic commitment to the idea 
of stakeholder engagement before embarking 
on the process. This commitment will need to be 
revisited throughout the process as the 
particular costs, beneﬁts and demands of the 
engagement process become clearer. 
Develop an understanding of the principles  
of materiality, completeness and 
responsiveness, how these relate to 
stakeholder engagement and to your own 
organisational values.
Do you understand these principles? 
How do they differ from or relate to your 
organisation’s guiding principles and  
working practices? 
How can they best be communicated and 
applied in your context? Assemble a cross functional group of  
relevant people from within the organisation 
and outside.
Stakeholder engagement should ideally begin 
with a process of internal learning and 
engagement. Those who have knowledge about 
the organisation, the issues of concern or the 
stakeholder groups involved as well as those in 
charge of putting insights and agreements into 
action need to be involved in the process at each 
step. Start by identifying these people – the list 
may change and grow throughout the process. 
It might include company insiders from the 
strategic planning, the legal department, risk 
management, external communications, 
operations, marketing, EHS, HR or investor 
relations. It could also include external 
consultants or stakeholders you already engage 
with. At many stages you will need to gather 
information and initiate discussion with these 
people through interviews, workshops or 
meetings as well as involving or keeping them 
informed of the engagement process itself.  You 
may also want to formally convene a group to 
steer the process.
Consider how you will keep track of 
information.
The process outlined in this handbook has  
the potential of generating a mass of information 
– ﬁrst about general categories such as 
stakeholders and issues, and later about 
speciﬁc stakeholders, information sources, 
benchmarks and viewpoints.  
You will need a robust mechanism for organising 
this information both in order to make it useful 
and available to stakeholders and managers 
and to enable external assurance of the process 
if necessary.  
Each Stage includes a number of summary 
templates which provide useful means to record 
outputs at key stages in the process. You may 
also want to develop a database to track 
individual stakeholder contact details 
and concerns.BEFORE YOU STARTIntroduction
Before you start
STAGE 1
PURPOSE
The aim of this ﬁrst Stage is to identify your reasons for stakeholder engagement 
and the key stakeholder groups and issues that relate to your organisation. This 
will provide a basis for ensuring that stakeholder engagement informs and 
becomes part of your business strategy.
It is important not to jump directly into engagement but to think strategically 
ﬁrst: Why do you and your stakeholders want to engage? Who do you need to 
engage with? About what issues? What do you want to achieve, and how will you 
know if you are successful?
PRINCIPLES   
The key principle at this Stage is materiality. 
 'Inclusivity'
Principles"acknowledging stakeholders right to be heard, and accounting for one’s actions to stakeholders '"
Here that means:  The organisation  identiﬁes  and addresses  the most material  impacts  related  
to it's business  operations  and the stratergy,  as well as the stakeholders  that are subject to these 
impacts. Futhermore, the organisation  identiﬁes  and addresses  the stakeholders  with signiﬁcant  
potential  to inﬂuence  the organisation.Responsiveness Completeness MaterialityThink Strategically
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 21
PROCESS
The actions and tools outlined in this Stage are based on three linked questions 
which need to be answered in order to align your stakeholder engagement 
processes with your organisation’s strategic objectives.
You do not have to work through this Stage in the order presented in this 
chapter – where you start will depend on your own context, and on whether you 
are already engaging or are a newcomer. The four examples below highlight the 
routes taken by four diﬀerent organisations each starting from a diﬀerent point .Think Strategically
Branded sportswear company   
Why? We need to respond to 
criticisms and campaigns, 
which are damaging our 
reputation.
What  issue?  Labour standards 
in our supply chains.
Who? Which  NGOs and other 
groups can we work with 
constructively?Global retailer
Who? Potential new customers, 
staff and communities in 
emerging markets.
Why? To understand  them 
and their social and cultural 
expectations.
What  issues?  Identify issues 
considered important by 
stakeholder groups.Industry association
Why? To develop and gain 
support for sector level 
sustainability strategy.
Who? Member companies and 
wider stakeholders.
What issues ? Identify issues 
and challenges relevant to 
sector sustainability with 
stakeholders.Cement manufacturer
What  issue?  
Where should we site a new 
factory?
Why? Engage with local 
community to help identify 
issues related to different sites 
and reduce risk of planning 
permission being blocked.
Who? Local groups and 
individuals.Example sequences in approaching stakeholder engagement strategically:STAGE 1. THINK ST RATEGICALLY.
Why 
engage?
Who to  
engage withWhat to 
engage about
Strategic
AlignmentStage 1
Think 
Strategically
STAGE 1
The process outlined in this Stage is for developing a comprehensive overview of 
material issues and relevant stakeholder groups. This does not necessarily need 
to be undertaken at the start of every individual engagement process. Often you 
need to react ﬂexibly and swiftly to a speciﬁc stakeholder group or issue, which 
arises unexpectedly.  However, an understanding of the materiality of the issue is 
always important in guiding your responses. A strategic approach to stakeholder 
engagement ensures that your organisation is able to understand and respond to  
the full range of material issues and challenges facing it, not just lurch from crisis  
to crisis.
The full process outlined here aims to provide a comprehensive and forward 
looking pre-assessment that helps companies to gain an overview and an 
understanding of the relative importance of the key issues and stakeholder groups 
that it should endeavour to address.  A company does not necessarily have to go 
through the whole process, but it should ensure that it has answers for the most 
important questions: 
–  Who are it's stakeholders? 
–   Which are the most important objectives that stakeholder engagement should  
help us and others to achieve?
–   What is the societal Stage of maturity of the key issues that the company needs 
 to address? [see p 40 for further discussion on issue maturity]. 
Telefónica Partners with Main Representative Association of Disabled People
As part of it’s wider Telefónica Accessible  initiative, the telecommunications company has formed a partnership with CERMI, Spain’s 
largest organisation of disabled people, representing 3.5 million disabled people and their families. This collaboration enables it to fully 
understand their needs and expectancies, while helping Telef ónica to learn from and innovate for the beneﬁt of disabled people, and 
ensuring the suitability of developed products and helping in the anticipation of future regulatory developments regarding accessibility. 
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 23
Analyse and Plan the Engagement
P1: MAPPING YOUR STAKEHOLDERS
BACKGROUND
Stakeholders are  individuals or groups who aﬀect, or are aﬀected by an 
organisation and its activities.3  
There is no generic list of stakeholders for all companies, or even for a single 
company (these will change over time) – those who aﬀect and are aﬀected depends 
on the industry, company, geography and the issue in question. New business 
strategies and changes in the business environment will often mean a new set of 
stakeholders. The box below highlights some of the broad groupings typically 
considered.  
There are a number of diﬀerent dimensions that you can consider when identifying 
stakeholders;
 1.  By responsibility:   people to whom you have, or in the future may have,  legal, 
ﬁnancial and operational responsibilities enshrined in regulations,  
contracts, policies or codes of practice.
2.  By inﬂuence: people who are, or in future may be, able to inﬂuence the ability of 
your organisation to meet its goals – whether their actions are likely to drive or 
impede your performance. These can include those with informal inﬂuence and 
those with formal decision making power.
3.  By proximity:  the people that your organisation interacts with most, including 
internal stakeholders, those with longstanding relationships,  those you depend 
on in your day-to-day operations, and those living next to your production sites.
4.  By dependency:  the people that are most dependent on your organisation, for 
example employees and their families, customers who are dependent on your 
products for their safety, livelihood, health or welfare or suppliers for whom you 
are a dominant customer.
5.  By representation: the people that are through regulatory structures or culture/
tradition entrusted to represent other individuals; e.g. heads of a local 
community, trade union representatives, councillors, representatives of 
membership based organisations, etc.. 
3 Freeman, R.Edward. Strategic Management: A Stakeholder Approach. Boston 1984.Stakeholders might include, but are not limited to:
> Investors/shareholders/ members
> Customers and potential customers
> Suppliers/business partners
> Employees
> Government and regulators
> The media
> Trade Unions
> NGOs and pressure groups
> Host communities
> Competitors/peers
> Opinion leaders
> Academia and the scientiﬁc community
> Supranational institutions
STAGE 1
SUGGESTED METHODOLOGY M1:
 MAPPING YOUR STAKEHOLDERS
Th  e purpose of this activity is to ensure that, as far as possible, all relevant stakeholders 
are identiﬁ  ed.  
Convene a cross-functional group of people  who have broad knowledge about 
the organisation, project, department or even speciﬁ  c issue that you want to 
identify the stakeholders for. Th  ese could include, but are not limited to, people 
from the legal department, risk management, external communications, 
procurement, EHS, HR, and investor relations. You could also involve external 
consultants and specialists. 
Brainstorm a list of stakeholder categories  using the three dimensions outlined 
below (Depending on size of group you may want to do this in pairs or small 
groups before sharing conclusions as a wall display)
People you have 
legal, ﬁ  nancial or operational 
responsibilities to.
Stakeholders who are 
affected by your organisation's 
operations.People who are likely to inﬂ  uence 
your organisation's performance
(those with inﬂ  uence and 
decision makers)SUMMARY  TEMPLATE  T1: MAPPING STAKEHOLDERS* 
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 25*electronic version downloadable at www.accountability.org.uk
Analyse and Plan the Engagement
Group the stakeholders into categories  (you may want to use the generic 
categories highlighted above, or use your own categories) and subgroups  likely  
to share similar perspectives. For example “Non-governmental Organisations” 
might include humanitarian organisations, human rights organisations, animal 
welfare groups and environmental groups. This further diﬀerentiation is of critical 
importance, as this is where stakeholder identiﬁcation becomes meaningful and 
detailed enough to decide on their materiality and possible next steps.   
See examples below:P1: MAPPING YOUR STAKEHOLDERS
This is a high level stakeholder map developed by a UK pharmaceutical company
Sub-groups
Board  and executive  team
Management
Staff 
Trade unions
New recruits
Potential  recruits
Employees  who have left the company
Institutional  investors
Pension  funds
Fund managers  and analysts
Rating  agencies
Socially  responsible  investment  movement
National  Health  Service  Trusts
Doctors  
Patients
Private  clinics
Hospitals
Pharmacists
Wholesalers
Prescription  inﬂuences  (e.g. nurses,  social  
workers,  teachers,  psychologist)
Internal  clients
Suppliers  of materials  and ingredients
Contract  manufacturers
Doctors  (as R&D consultants)
Clinical  trial centres
Volunteers  and patients  in trials
Service  providers  and infrastructure  
products  Stakeholder  
Category
Employee
Investors
Customers
SuppliersStakeholder Category
Competitors
Government and 
Regulators
Business Partners
Local Communities
Academia and 
Scientiﬁc Community
Media
NGOs and Pressure 
GroupsSub-groups
Pharmaceutical companies 
Biotech companies
Department of Health
Pharmaceutical regulatory authorities
Food and Drug Administration (US)
World Health Organization (UN)
Licensees
R&D partners
Other p harmaceutical companies
Clinics/universit ies
Neighbours 
Local authorities/ Planning Department 
Charities and voluntary organisations
Environmental groups
University centres
Researchers
Students
TV and Radio
Medical/scientiﬁc publications  
National/local newspapers
Financial newspapers
Patient organisations
Human rights organisations
Animal welfare organisations
Environmental organisations
Alternative medicine associations
STAGE 1
THINGS TO CONSIDER
At this point, only consider general groups of stakeholders (e.g. environmental 
NGOs, not “Greenpeace” for example). Guidance on how to identify speciﬁc 
stakeholder group representatives will be provided in Stage 2. 
Many stakeholder groups will be included in more than one of these dimensions; 
you can situate them into the ‘overlaps’ between the circles.
A stakeholder map is not analytically comprehensive.  It is a tool that illustrates  
the range of stakeholders and helps you develop your engagement plan.
Do not  exclude any stakeholder groups at this Stage, even if you do not have good 
relations with them or you do not think they are willing to engage. 
The stakeholder map will evolve as the engagement process goes on and you learn 
more about your stakeholders.
As you engage with stakeholders you should also ask them who else they think 
you should engage with.  
Camelot's Eight Stakeholder Groups
Camelot, the operator of the UK national lottery, manages its social responsibilities and social impact in consultation with eight  
stakeholder groups: 
Players and Winners: The UK residents who regularly play National Lottery games, and winners of both large and small amounts.
Employees:  Around 900 full time equivalent staff.
Local community:  Communities represented by local charities, voluntary and community groups.
Governmental bodies:  The Department for Culture, Media and Sport, other government departments, the National Lottery 
Commission, the National Lottery Distribution Bodies and the National Lottery Promotions Unit.
Retailers:  Their network of around 28,000 retailers, ranging from the large supermarket chains to the corner shop.
Suppliers and partners:  Around 600 large and small suppliers of goods and services, and strategic partners.
Public interest groups:   Academic institutions, charities, religious groups, campaigning organisations and welfare groups 
representing amongst others those who may be at risk from gambling products, including young people, those on low incomes and 
those who may play excessively, or who work around environmental issues.
Shareholders:  Their ﬁve corporate shareholders. 
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 27
Analyse and Plan the Engagement
BACKGROUND
Why should you engage? The fact is you already do. Stakeholder engagement 
is not a new fad – it’s as old as business itself.  The process by which you already 
communicate with your shareholders, customers, staﬀ, business partners and 
suppliers is stakeholder engagement. In these cases, the strategic importance of 
engagement is immediately obvious. However, as we have seen, there are many 
good strategic and operational reasons to engage with less-traditional groups 
and on less-traditional issues. The table below highlights how the nature of 
stakeholder engagement is changing:
Norsk Hydro in the Barents Sea Region
The Norwegian oil and aluminium company Norsk Hydro started working with local communities to facilitate and support the 
development of a competitive local supplier industry in the Barents Sea region even before they had made a ﬁnal decision to build  
a production facility there. Developing a supply base alone would have been unfeasible for Norsk Hydro, due to a lack of local 
knowledge and insights into local development requirements. Working with local communities and the regional administration 
allowed them to learn from each other, develop a trust-based relationship, and to identify the best opportunities for developing the 
region to mutual advantage.
From traditional  
business  
interactions:
From legal and  
contractual  
issues:
From one-way  
communicationWhat issues do you need to address with them?Employees, customers, 
suppliers, investors, and 
regulators.
Marketing, industrial relations, 
site selection, business 
planning, and procurement.
Market  research, corporate 
communications, advertising 
and media publicity.Local communities , supply 
chain workers, employees' 
families, civil society 
organisations, …
Corruption, social exclusion, 
human rights, health risks, 
economic development,  
supply chain labour conditions, 
environmental impacts…
Consultation , stakeholder 
advisory panels, online 
feedback, multi-stakeholder 
forums and partnerships, 
convening networks of 
stakeholders.How do you do it ?Who are your stakeholders?THE CHANGING NATURE OF RELATIONSHIPS WITH STAKEHOLDERS
These changes in the nature of relationship with stakeholders are driven by a  
broad but interlinked variety of changes in the business environment. These include 
the eﬀects of technological innovations, political and regulatory developments, 
societal trends as well as market developments. The table on the next page provides  
a brief overview:  To broader groups:
To emerging issues  
and new 
responsibilities:
To dialogue and 
partnershi p:P2: SETTING STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES FOR ENGAGEMENT
STAGE 1
New Legal  and voluntary  obligations  to disclose  information  and engage  with stakeholders,   
for example:
–   The US Sarbanes  Oxley  Act, Federal  sentencing  guidelines,  Toxics  Release  Inventory  and Community  Reinvestment  
Act, as well as the Canadian  Bank  Act in North  America.
–   The UK Operating  and Financial  Review  and Pensions  Act, the French  New Economic  Regulations,  the Danish  
Financial  Statements  Act, the German  Bilanzrechtsreformgesetz,  Swedish  Annual  Accounts  Act and Dutch  
Environmental  Protection  Act in Europe.
–   The Japanese  Law of promotion  of environmentally  conscious  business  activities,  the Australian  Financial  Services  
Reform  Act, and voluntary  stock  exchange  requirements  for example in  South  Africa  and Brazil.
–   Whilst  various  Governments  in Europe  have started  to develop  national  corporate  responsibility  plans  in which  
stakeholder  engagement  is a key ingredient,  international  financial  institutions  (such as the International  Finance  
Corporation  and World  Bank)   today  also require  for stakeholder  engagement  in advance  of major  projects.
More  people  have become  interested  in the conduct  of business,  in the past decade:
–   World’s  number  of NGOs  has risen from 3,600  to 44,000  in the last two decades.
–   $1 in every  $8 in the USA is invested  according  to some  kind of ethical,  social  or environmental  criteria.
–  The Internet  has made  information  pervasive  and immediately  available.  
Companies  need  to understand  their consumers,  workers  and related  communities,  who  
are increasingly  concentrated  in emerging  markets:
–  Two out of five people  live in India  or China.
–  50% of the world’s  people  live on less than $2 per day.
–  By 2015  there  will be 2 billion  more  people,  almost  all born in developing  countries.
Society  increasingly  expects  business  to be part of the solution  in issues  like equity,  health  and security.
In the past decade:  
–  Strong  state intervention  or the ‘welfare  state’  has shrunk  in many  countries.
–   Foreign  direct  investment  has grown  tenfold  and is now more  than six times  greater  than international  aid.
–   Multistakeholder  partnerships  and initiatives  have become  key vehicles  mobilising  business  in development.
Technological inventions and applications raise often complex ethical questions and dilemmas in applying precaution.
In many cases companies alone may not have the answer and need societal / stakeholder dialogue to come to joint 
understanding of acceptable levels of risk. For example:
–  Genetically modiﬁed organisms (GMOs)
–  Nanotechnology
–  Mobile phone technology 
–  Nuclear power 
It has often taken a major incident for companies to realise that they need better systems for stakeholder engagement. 
For example :
–   The Bhopal tragedy in India led chemical companies to engage with stakeholders over environmental impacts,  
setting up the Responsible Care initiative.
–   Shell realised it had to engage with critical stakeholders after it faced campaigns against its handling of Brent Spar  
and treatment of the Ogoni people in Nigeria.
–   Press exposés on issues of child labour, forced labour and poor working conditions in chocolate, sportswear and 
mobile phone supply chains led to companies engaging with NGOs to address these issues.
–   The prevalence of industrial accident worldwide led to UNEP and the International Council  Chemical Associations 
setting up the  “Awareness and Preparedness for Emergencies at Local Level (APELL) Programme (see overleaf).New obligations
Public  Scrutiny
New Markets
Societal  
Expectations
New 
Technologies
Critical EventsThe changing drivers for engagement  4 
4 For a more h istorical overview of these trends, ple ase see this handbook 's sister publi cation, "The Guide to Practitioners' Perspectives". P16. Please als o see the introduction in this Handbook.
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 27
Analyse and Plan the Engagement
Many of the companies who actively engage with their stakeholders have been 
able to translate this  into better decision-making both within and outside of 
the company, and have used it as a strategic tool to strengthen their business 
performance, for example:
Agricultural company  Monsanto  admits that in the 1990s the company was arrogant and secretive in its dealings 
with the outside world over genetically modiﬁed crops, which severely damaged its reputation, markets and investor 
conﬁdence. The ﬁrm has now committed to ‘The New Monsanto Pledge’ of dialogue, transparency, technology sharing 
and respect for stakeholders.
The US company IBM considers community needs and beneﬁts alongside the R&D efforts that IBM makes in creating 
new products. Sometimes IBM will use the community to beta-test new products before going to market. The dual 
beneﬁts of this approach are that the community gets quicker and cheaper access to products that are useful to them 
and IBM gets valuable information about its products before going to market.
Nike established a multi-stakeholder Report Review Committee to consult them during the development of their 2005 
CSR report. As an outcome of consultation and negotiation with these stakeholders, Nike disclosed an unprecedented 
wealth of information about its supply-chain, including labour and human rights abuses. In doing this, they raised 
the benchmark for corporate transparency and contributed to taking the societal dialogue on corporate responsibility 
issues to a higher level.  
The Spanish telecommunications company Telefónica  has a history of extensive efforts to provide integrated support 
to the disabled, access to telecommunications to the disadvantaged, and of a range of other initiatives to contribute to 
society. It’s employees reward this with a remarkably high satisfaction rate: In a survey undertaken in 2004, 77% of the 
174,000 Telefónica employees responded with “Yes, I am happy to be working in this company”. The culture of social 
responsibility is reinforced by and expresses itself in initiatives like ATAM, a Telefónica association providing care for 
disabled people. ATAM was founded out of the commitment of employees in partnership with labour unions and the 
company itself in 1973. Telefónica employees give 1% of their salary to this initiative, Telefónica doubles this amount. 
Employees, company and unions are present in ATAM governance bodies. See also www.atam.es.
The UK telecommunications company  Orange  engages with local communities and administrations in order to identify 
and ideally agree on the best possible location for new mobile phone transmitter masts. As the number of its masts 
determines its networks capacity and business potential, engaging with these communities to make its networks 
expansion as smooth as possible is a strategic priority.
IBM's Community R elations Unit b rokered a partnership b etween IBM's rese arch labs and the non-p roﬁt organisation 
SeniorN et to help them understand the needs of computer users with vision, motor and memory impa irments and to 
develop and test solution s.
The Norweig an oil and aluminium company Norsk Hydro  is continously discussing common standards for corporate 
responsibility with industry peers.  The key objective here is to take social and environmental issues out of business 
competition, as competitive pressures can keep companies from adopting more responsible practices. Within the 
IPIECA (International Petroleum Industry Environmental Conversation Association), the competitors agree on social 
standards that are promoted by the association in cooperation with governments. 
The French water company Suez is working with governments, NGOs and citizens to reduce the cost of delivering 
water and sewage services to poor communities. In Bolivia, Argentina and the Philippines local communities have 
been involved in designing, digging and installing a pipeline that provides affordable water services proﬁtably.Strengthened 
ability to assess 
and manage risks.
Learning on 
products and 
processes.
Greater credibility 
amongst 
stakeholders.
Better  
recruitment and 
retention 
of employees.
Securing the 
formal and 
informal licence 
to operate from 
government, 
regulators and 
communities. 
Learni ng and 
insights from 
non-traditional 
sources.
Collaboration to 
address problems 
and opportunities, 
and to change 
the ‘rules of the 
game’.P2: SETTING STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES FOR ENGAGEMENT
Examples of business beneﬁts of engagement
STAGE 1
In late 1986, following various chemical accidents, UNEP suggested a series of measures to help governments, particularly in 
developing countries, to reduce the occurrence and harmful effects of technological accidents and emergencies. A key outcome of 
this has been the development of a programme in which stakeholder engagement takes centre Stage in the form of the local level 
company plant working with the local community. 
The APPEL Programme (Awareness and Preparedness for Emergencies at Local Level) has been started by UNEP with the 
International Council of Chemical Associations (ICCA) and other industry associations, governments and local communities.  
The aim has been to minimise the occurrence and harmful effects of technological accidents and emergencies by raising awareness 
within local communities and by improving communication between the parties. APELL provides a well-structured, detailed 
process for developing a co-ordinated, integrated and well-functioning emergency response plan for local communities. It is a tool 
for bringing people together to allow effective communication concerning risks and emergency responses. This process aims to:
• reduce risk;
• improve effectiveness of response to accidents;
• allow people to react appropriately during emergencies.
The APPEL programme recognises that industries have a responsibility both to minimise risks and to ensure effective planning for 
response, even though it is normally government agencies that have the statutory responsibility to address emergencies outside 
industrial facilities. The APELL concept has been successfully introduced in more than 30 countries and in over 80 industrialised 
communities world wide. 
APELL was also featured at the World Conference on Disaster Reduction (WCDR), held in Kobe (Japan) in January 2005, where 
international priorities and mandates in disaster prevention for the following 10 years have been established.  
See further www.uneptie.org/pc/apell/home.html
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 31Awareness and Preparedness for Emergencies at Local Level (APELL) Programme.
Analyse and Plan the Engagement
SUGGESTED METHODOLOGY M2:  
SETTING STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES FOR ENGAGEMENT
The purpose of this activity is to clarify your overall reasons for stakeholder engagement  
and how they relate to broader strategic business objectives.
The examples highlighted previously illustrate some of the business beneﬁts that  
engaging with stakeholders can generate. However, it is important to identify the 
possible beneﬁts that it can deliver for your speciﬁc company or project in your speciﬁc 
situation. Getting involved in wrong engagements can lead to a misuse of resources and 
distract you from more pressing priorities. 
To be eﬀective, stakeholder engagement must be relevant to and aligned with your 
own business strategy. Setting strategic engagement objectives is a useful step towards 
developing robust approach to stakeholder engagement and to evaluating success.
•  Consider strategic business objectives,  either for the company as a whole or for  
 the department or project which is the focus of analysis. Where such objectives 
 are not explicitly set, make sure you agree some key strategic objectives with the
 team responsible for the department or project. Strategic business objectives could 
 for example be:
– “To gain 10% annual sales increases in region X for the next ﬁve years.”
– “To meet our majority of customers’ expectations for responsibly produced goods.”
– “To secure our long-term license to operate in countries that host our sites.”
– “To identify and make use of new opportunities in less developed countries.”
– “ Ensure that our products meet all current and future regulatory requirements in the 
European market.”
– “To minimise negative social impacts resulting from the closure of production sites.”
• Facilitate a discussion around these objectives, speciﬁcally focusing on the   
 implications these have for your relationships with stakeholders.   
 Consider the questions below, and capture the most important answers in T emplate 2.
–  How do these overall business objectives relate to our broader stakeholder groups?
–   What are the external drivers for stakeholder engagement for us? (and what are the
 risks of failing to engage?)
–   What are we trying to accomplish through stakeholder engagement? What would
 success look like?
–   Why is this important to us? How does it support our business objectives and
 strategies?
 
 Examples are given in summary Template T2.P2: SETTING STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES FOR ENGAGEMENT
STAGE 1
• Identify Strategic Engagement Objectives, and capture them as brief   
 declarations  that link stakeholder engagement to strategic  business  
 objectives:
– “To manage the risks associated with...”
– “To develop a new approach to...”
– “To learn more about...”
– “To collaborate in addressing...”
– “To improve our relationship with...”
– “To ﬁnd an agreement on...”
– “To develop our policy on...”
– “To inform our decision on...”
Examples are given in summary Template 2.
THINGS TO CONSIDER
Stakeholder engagement involves time, resources and commitment, to a degree 
that is easily under-estimated, as has already become clear in the research for 
Volume 1 of this manual.  Although the resource implications will not be clear 
until you have developed a more detailed plan and a better understanding of your 
stakeholders expectations, it is important to start the process with the buy-in and 
participation of leadership. Top-level involvement in objective setting helps to 
secure alignment and buy-in.
You may want to group the objectives, and/or formulate and categorise according 
to short, medium and long-term objectives for engagement. 
You will set more detailed objectives for engagement in Stage 2.
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 33
What are our external drivers for stakeholder 
engagement?
Examples: 
Complex and dynamic development of markets 
in region x.
Changing customer expectations regarding 
responsible products and services.
Importance of maintaining ‘licence to operate’
Important opportunities in developing markets
Increased regulation of products and services
Decreased staff morale and negative media 
attention because of site closures.What beneﬁ  ts can we gain from stakeholder 
engagement?
Examples :
Understand the market and ﬁ  nd partners 
important to be successful in region X
Increased understanding of expectations and 
requirements
Securing the licence to operate 
Identiﬁ  cation and realisation of opportunities
Improved anticipation of and inﬂ  uence on 
regulatory developments
Improved staff morale, more welcoming 
communities for new sites.
What are the risks of not engaging? 
Examples : 
Making the wrong development projections and failing to establish the relationships that 
are required for success in the market of region X.
Failure to meet customers expectations regarding responsible products and services.
Losing the licence to operate in host countries.
Failure to make use of opportunities in and help in the development of developing countries.
Failure of our products  and services or research and development activities to correspond 
with regulatory developments.
Less attractiveness  as an employer and increasingly unwelcoming communities.
Strategic objectives of engagement:  
Examples : 
Learn and understand long-term trends in the behaviour of stakeholders that shape the 
market in region X.  
Develop relationships that are key to success in region X.
To understand  customers’ expectations regarding the responsible production of goods.
To inform our decision on the social and environmental management of our supply-chain. 
To manage the risks to our licence to operate in our host countries.
To partner with those stakeholders  for the development of and success in new markets in 
developing countries.
To be informed of and involved in the shaping of current and potential regulatory 
developments regarding our products and services.
To work with relevant stakeholders  in understanding and mitigating socio-economic 
impacts of site closures.
To enhance our reputation for responsible  employment and site-management practices.SUMMARY TEMPLATE T2: 
SETTING STRATEGIC ENGAGEMENT OBJECTIVES* 
(This is partly ﬁ  lled in to match the example business objectives given above:)P2: SETTING STRATEGIC OBJECTIVES FOR ENGAGEMENTAnalyse and Plan the Engagement
*electronic version downloadable at www.accountability.org.uk
STAGE 1
P3: IDENTIFYING ISSUES
BACKGROUND
Many issues you should consider engaging on will already be clear from the 
strategic engagement objectives discussed above. However, there are issues 
that may not be immediately strategically relevant, but nonetheless need to 
be identiﬁed and addressed, as they also have the potential to impede business 
performance. In general, issues can be speciﬁc or general aspects of a companies 
activities or decisions where:
–  The organisation is perceived to have a positive or negative impact on   
 stakehold ers. 
AND
–   There is a gap between what the company is doing or perceived to be doing,
 and what stakeholders expect the company to be doing in terms of 
 management of impacts, behaviour or outcomes.
This range of relevant issues goes beyond the limited deﬁnition of materiality 
used in ﬁnancial accounting standards, which are often interpreted conservatively 
to mean only those issues that are likely to have a measurable short-term 
impact on the ﬁnancial health of an organisation. This deﬁnition of materiality 
does not consider broader economic, social, environmental issues and leaves 
the organisation open to unanticipated risks and unable to identify new 
opportunities. On the other hand without some way of assessing the importance 
of diﬀerent issues to corporate performance, stakeholder engagement risks getting 
caught up by the short-term dynamics and moods of public opinion. 
A key challenge then is to identify those issues which are material to the business’s 
long-term sucess. Accountability's approach to assesing materiality is described 
below.
Issues that have direct short-term ﬁnancial impacts
Issues where the company has agreed policy statements of a strategic nature – these are 
often in the form of commitments to key stakeholders.
Issues that comparable organisations consider within their sphere of materiality; i.e. peer-
based norms.
Issues that your stakeholders consider important enough to act on (now or in the future).
Issues which are considered social norms (as indicated by regulations, likely future 
regulation or institutionalised norms and standards).5-Part Materiality Test
AccountAbility has developed a ﬁve-part materiality test as a framework for 
considering the materiality of issues .5 Issues are considered material if they can  
be identiﬁed by one or more of the following tests:
A
B
C
D
E
5 For further explanation, please see AccountAbility & The UK Social Investment Forum: “Redeﬁning Materiality”, London, 2003
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 35
Relevant Sources of Information (see also  'Links into Learning Networks' p57 )
Issues relating to b usiness strategy and plans, risk assessments, accidents and penalties / 
ﬁnes, areas of lobbying expenditure.
Corporate policies and existing commitments to stakeholders.
Policies and practices of competitor organisations. Issues highlighted by industry 
associations and corporate responsibility organisations (such as the International Business 
Leaders Forum, the World Business Council for Sustainable Development).
(See below for sources of stakeholder information)
Areas of regulation, proposed regulation and international agreement, voluntary codes and 
multi-stakeholder frameworks / initiatives (such as the Global Reporting Initiative Guidelines 
and the UN Global Compact principles). Emerging norms highlighted by governments, 
intergovernmental bodies and NGOs.Using this test entails many subjective judgements (for example whether 
stakeholders are really going to translate their stated concerns into investment or 
purchasing decisions). There is also something of a ‘chicken and egg’ problem in 
using test D, which depends on stakeholders expressing their concerns to identify 
issues for stakeholder engagement. However in practice, the test is intended to 
be used iteratively; it builds on a company’s existing Stage of development in 
understanding stakeholder concerns, but you must also reconsider the answers 
you give ‘now’ later on when you have had more contact with stakeholders. 
SUGGESTED METHODOLOGY M3:    
IDENTIFYING MATERIAL ISSUES
The purpose of this activity is to identify as comprehensively as possible the issues 
associated with the organisation, project or decision in question and to build an 
understanding of how they relate to speciﬁc stakeholders expectations or concerns. 
This step can be done in a group/workshop setting or as a research process by the 
team leading the engagement process (or by external contractors).
Use the the 5-part materiality test to identify relevant issues: 
Materiality test
A. Short-term ﬁnancial 
impacts
B. Policy commitment 
C. Peer based norms
D. Stakeholder 
behaviour and 
concerns
E. Societal norms 
Identify potential stakeholder concerns (test D) using existing organisational 
knowledge, research and exploratory engagement with key stakeholders as 
appropriate.  Sources of information for identifying stakeholder concerns at  
this Stage include:P3: IDENTIFYING ISSUESThink Strategically
Sources of information for materiality test
STAGE 1
Individuals within the organisation will already have some knowledge of stakeholder 
concerns from their current contacts with stakeholders and understanding of the issues 
affecting their part of the organisation. Stakeholders will already be raising issues through 
existing feedback mechanisms from customer hotlines to investor relations meetings. This 
existing knowledge could be brought together through a process of systematic review, 
interviews or workshops with key managers and stakeholders close to the organisation.
In some cases it may be best to leave the identiﬁcation of issues open and set the agenda 
with the stakeholders during the engagement process itself. However, while this does allow 
for maximum stakeholder involvement in identifying issues, it may lead to unmanageable 
dialogue which is difﬁcult to feed into decision making processes, and leaves stakeholders 
frustrated that the engagement is all talk and no action.
More passive monitoring of stakeholder viewpoints about the company and industry 
impacts and performance can also be used to identify issues without raising stakeholders’ 
expectations at this Stage. This might include monitoring information sources such 
as national, local, and relevant specialist and academic press, government and 
intergovernmental organisations’ communications or reports, NGO campaigns, inﬂuential 
public and opinion research and relevant internet discussion forums.‘What we know’ 
‘What they tell us’
‘ What they say  
about us’ 
Compare your strategic engagement objectives with the issues  you have 
highlighted through the materiality test. Each of your strategic engagement 
objectives is likely to relate to a number of issues. E.g. satisfying your customers 
demand for responsibly produced goods may require you to consider various 
human rights, environmental and health and safety issues. If you feel that any 
issue is missing, make sure you include it into your list of issues, and assess it 
according to the ﬁve-part test, too.
Using the above-mentioned sources of information, as appropriate, list  
the issues in the matrix (T3). Then insert the stakeholder groups or sub-groups 
already identiﬁed.
Apply the materiality test by considering each of the issues in relation to each 
of the ﬁve dimensions. Insert a colour-code as suggested in the matrix, and/or 
provide descriptive assessments of the materiality of the issue to the individual 
dimensions of the materiality test.
Consider the degree of concern amongst stakeholders regarding the issue   
and again capture your results in the table, by using the scoring suggested in the 
table, and/or by providing descriptive assessments of  the stakeholders’ concerns. 
Ensure a validation of the matrix.  The issue/stakeholder matrix provides a 
record of the identiﬁcation and analysis of stakeholders and issues at this Stage 
and should be validated by relevant managers and departments, as well as any 
other stakeholder groups or experts you are already working with.
The matrix provides a preliminary prioritisation of stakeholders , telling  
you which ones are most concerned about which issues. Further steps for 
prioritisation will follow. See also the ‘How to Use’ guide at the bottom of the 
methodology.Sources of information for stakeholder concerns and exp ectations
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 37
SUMMARY TEMPLATE T3: OBJECTIVE, ISSUE AND STAKEHOLDER MATRIX *
How to Use:  
1.  Enter strategic engagement objectives and allocate issues where possible (issues may be relevant to several objectives  
– others may also not be directly related to a strategic objective!)
2.  Enter Materiality Score (see above)
3.  Assess the Stakeholders perception of issues either descriptively and/or using a rating,  such as:
  0  not relevant
1  awareness amongst a few, but no real concern
2  broader awareness, but little concern
3  considerable concern amongst a minority 
4  considerable concern amongst many
5  high level of widespread concern 
The table provides you with a summary of key issues, why they are material and which stakeholder groups they are related to. 
You could also decide on threshold scores (or colours ).P3: IDENTIFYING ISSUES
Strategic Engagement 
Objective  (if applicable)
1. To address signiﬁ  cant 
stakeholders 
concerns when 
dealing with 
genetically modiﬁ  ed 
organismsABCD E Materiality test Stakeholder
Group  1
IssueStakeholder
Group  2Stakeholder
Group  3Stakeholder
Group  4
Green:  not relevant Yellow:   low relevance Orange:  medium Red: high relevanceCo-operative 
group me mbersFarmcare (Co-
op's Farming
Business)NGOsObjective, Issue and Stakeholder Matrix
Consumers
2.  (insert next strategic 
objective, if 
applicable...)Stakeholder
Group  5
Non-Food
Suppliers
i. Safety of GM 
in food
ii. Impact of GM 
on biodiversity
iii. Impact of th e 
removal of GM 
within non-food
iv. Impact of th e 
removal of GM 
within packaging
v. Intra-Group risk  
assosciated 
with implementing  
the policy
vi. (..further 
issues..)4 4 5 5 1
3 4 5 5 1
1 3 0 4 1
1 3 1 4 3
0 4 4 0 1For the ﬁ  rst strategic objective, the tenplate has been ﬁ  lled in by the UK's Co-Operative Group, who used it to consider the impact of 
genetically modiﬁ  ed organisms (GM) on their businessThink Strategically
*electronic version downloadable at www.accountability.org.uk
STAGE 1
THINGS  TO CONSIDER
This is only a preliminary identiﬁcation and assessment of which stakeholders  
are likely to be most concerned about which issues. Further steps for 
prioritisation will follow. 
Check  your  ‘results’.  Show the matrix to relevant decision makers within your 
organisation, to some stakeholders you already have a good relationship with, 
or have experts of speciﬁc fields review it. This will enhance the reliability of the 
pre-assessment. 
Not all material issues can be allocated to strategic objectives. This does not 
mean you can ignore them. It is important for the compilation of the list 
to remain open-minded  and flexible  to issues that may be important to 
stakeholders, but are not immediately seen as relevant to the organisation.  
Only then can the list be comprehensive.
The issue/stakeholder matrix is not set in stone, but is likely to evolve and 
develop as you gain more understanding of stakeholders and issues.  
Review  this table  as you learn  more  about  your  stakeholders.
The issue/stakeholder matrix also highlights where diﬀerent groups of 
stakeholders are concerned about the same issue and might be better approached 
through a multi-stakeholder process rather than on a one-to-one basis  
(see Stage 2 for more on multi-stakeholder engagement).
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 39
P4: PRIORITISING STAKEHOLDERS AND ISSUES
BACKGROUND
Engaging with all stakeholders or on all issues is neither possible nor desirable. 
This would go beyond any available resources, and at the same time make it very 
diﬃcult to adequately respond to stakeholders, leading to frustration. Therefore, 
you should try and prioritise your stakeholders and issues to ensure that time, 
resources and expectations are well managed.  
The previous processes have enabled an initial overview of the materiality of 
issues and the related concerns and expectations of stakeholders, as well as over 
their relationship to the organisation's strategic objectives. However, further 
factors need to be considered before deciding on priorities for engagement. 
Prioritisation is diﬃcult because it is often not possible to quantify the various 
‘stakes’ and make objective comparisons. Nevertheless by setting clear criteria 
for prioritisation linked to the company processes and business strategy you 
are better able to steer the engagement away from being driven by un-strategic 
considerations such as the ‘noisiest’ stakeholders, the short-term focus of the 
media, or the comfort-zone of managers. Below are two ways of prioritising 
stakeholders:
Prioritisation according to the social maturity of issues
One useful way to understand the wide range of issues raised by the diversity  
of stakeholders is to consider the maturity of the issues. Pharmaceutical 
company Novo Nordisk created a scale to classify issues according to their 
maturity (see box).
SIG's Initial Prioritisation and Categorisation of Stakeholders
The Swiss utilities company SIG started the process of prioritisation with a discussion amongst the executive management team. 
The sustainable development team facilitated the discussion. It identiﬁed an ‘a-priori’ set of stakeholder categories: shareholders, 
clients, business partners, employees, public contractors and civil society interest groups.
The expectations of these groups, and their degree of satisfaction with SIG’s performance, were subsequently evaluated in various 
dialogues with stakeholders. Existing customer surveys also served to shed further light on these subjects. In the prioritisation of 
their stakeholders, SIG considered their importance to SIG’s strategic business objectives, and their current degree of satisfaction.Think Strategically
– Some activist communities and NGOs are aware of the issue.
– There is weak scientiﬁc or other hard evidence.
–  The issue is largely ignored or dismissed by the business community,
– There is political and media awareness of the societal issue.
–  There is an emerging body of research, but data are still weak.
–  Leading businesses experiment with approaches to dealing with the issue.
–  There is an emerging body of business practices around the societal issue.
–  Sector wide and issue-based voluntary initiatives are established.
–  There is litigation and an increasing recognition of the need for legislation.
–  Voluntary standards are developed, and collective action occurs.
– Legislation or business norms are established.
–  The embedded practices become a normal part of a business-excellence model.Latent
Emerging
Consolidating
Institutionalised
The same issue can be at diﬀerent stages of maturity in diﬀerent regions 
or countries, and in diﬀerent industries. For example, biodiversity is an 
institutionalised issue for European businesses, but an emerging one in North 
America, whilst employee privacy is only an emerging issue in Europe but 
already institutionalised in the US. Similarly, whilst animal welfare has been on 
the agenda for the pharmaceutical industry for some time (in relation to animal 
testing) and business norms on animal testing have now become institutionalised 
in this industry, within the oil and gas industry it is only now emerging as an issue 
of controversy and debate, although animal welfare NGOs express much concern 
about the use of animals in testing petrochemical products. 
While acknowledging the fact that issues, which are high on the ‘maturity 
ladder’, receive quite a lot of attention in various ways, this does not mean 
that the societal debate about its resolution is over. At the same time, high 
social maturity also does not necessarily imply that a sustainable solution 
has been found – nor that the current approach is acceptable to the majority 
of stakeholders. Therefore, an eﬃcient process of stakeholder engagement 
needs to be open to constant change and to the involvement of changing 
stakeholder groups, even if the issue is becoming increasingly institutionalised. 
A good example of this is the development of corporate reporting practices on 
environmental issues in the last 20 years.
At each Stage of maturity there is a diﬀerent mix of stakeholder expectations, 
external pressures, risks and opportunities, all of which are essential to 
understand in prioritising areas for engagement and planning the actual 
engagement processes.STAGE 1
The Four Stages of Issue Maturity
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 41
In general, the more mature an issue is, the more essential it is for a company 
to address the issue. However, the response to the issue also depends on the 
company’s general approach towards stakeholder engagement, or issues of 
corporate responsibility more generally. The table below illustrates the way that 
a company, which considers stakeholder engagement as an opportunity, might 
typically decide to react to each Stage, as well as the reactions of a company that 
takes a more defensive, reactive approach.
Leadership company’s 
stakeholder engagement 
process.
Maintaining ongoing dialogue 
with NGOs and stakeholder 
opinion leaders.
Working with an international  
organisation to develop new 
preventative or proactive 
management, production or 
marketing approaches that 
address stakeholder concerns.  
Play a leading role in multi-
sector and sector-wide 
responses to the issue by 
promoting best practise and 
developing standards
Formalised engagement 
processes such as industrial 
relations with trade unions or 
governments.Leadership company’s 
opportunity focused response:  
Gain early understanding of 
new risks and opportunities, 
and practise precaution as 
required.
Address the issue early to win 
market shares, or competitive 
or reputational advantages.
Finding allies for managing 
and addressing these impacts 
to prevent  best practise from 
being undercut by companies 
that ignore the impacts.
Making sure that everybody 
complies with social norms 
and commitments. Stage of 
issue maturityDefensive company’s response
“ It’s not our job to understand 
that”
“ It’s not our job to  
address that”
“ It’s not our job to  
regulate that”
“We’ll do it if we have to”Novo Nordisk and the growth of diabetes in the developing world
The Danish healthcare company Novo Nordisk’s main business is the prevention and treatment of diabetes. Diabetes is now 
recognised as a pandemic, and the current number of people with diabetes, which in 2003 has been estimated to be 194million, is 
expected toincrease to 333 million by 2025.  Two-thirds of future diabetes cases are expected to occur in the developing world.
Meeting the associated challenges is complicated. Low- and middle-income countries often lack the healthcare information to meet 
the needs of a growing number of people with diabetes. Furthermore, a lacking awareness of and education about diabetes is a serious 
problem. Therefore, many experts believe that the solution lies in taking an approach that combines increased awareness, education 
and prevention with improved access to treatment. 
Novo Nordisk works together with governments, patient organisations and other partners to improve diabetes care in poorer countries, 
using its expertise and competence in diabetes to address some of the above issues. At the same time, Novo Nordisk is building a 
long-term sustainable business advantage as a leader in diabetes care in the developing world, while responding to growing pressure 
from society to increase access to medicine in developing countries.
This strategy for improved access to diabetes care has been built on World Health Organisation’s recommendations. Novo Nordisk 
supports the building and development of national healthcare strategies and capacities with the National Diabetes Programme, which 
is setting up diabetes activities in eight developing or emerging economies. Activities include educating nurses, equipping diabetes 
clinics, supporting diabetes patient organisations and working with governments. It has also offered insulin to the public health 
systems of the 50 least developed countries, as deﬁned by the UN, at prices not to exceed 20% of the average price in the highly 
developed countries of North America, Europe and Japan. 
Latent
Emerging
InstitutionalisedConsolidatingP4: PRIORITISING STAKEHOLDERS AND ISSUES
Company 
responseDifferent responses to the maturity of issuesThink Strategically
STAGE 1Stakeholder dependence on  
the organisationFurther to my points above, it's important to note that dialogue doesn't necessarily 
stop or 'just' become formaised once an issue becomes inststutionalised.
Between defensive and opportunity focused companies, there is a spectrum 
of approaches where companies take an increasingly proactive and embedded 
approach to addressing issues raised by stakeholders. 
Prioritising according to the inﬂuence and dependence of stakeholders
Another way to approach the question of strategic alignment is identifying those 
stakeholders that are likely to have the greatest impact on the achievement of 
your strategic objectives, and those stakeholders that will be most positively or 
negatively impacted by the company’s operations. This will enable you to prioritise 
your attention and action to ensure that you can achieve your strategic objectives, 
while respecting the rights of signiﬁcantly impacted stakeholders.
In order to ensure this, a company might prioritise stakeholder groups in this way:
However, for any particular company or issue, such a matrix may need to be 
adjusted to reﬂect the most relevant prioritisation criteria in each case. For 
example, instead of company dependence, one could consider the dependence  
of speciﬁc strategic business objectives, or of speciﬁc business divisions on the 
stakeholders, which would allow for a more speciﬁc prioritisation of stakeholders.
Also, it is important to be aware of the interactions between the diﬀerent 
stakeholder groups, for example through lobbying or advocacy activities.  
One key driver for corporate responsibility in recent years has been the 
development of coalitions of diverse stakeholders around key issues. In particular, 
high inﬂuence /low dependency stakeholders such as investors and consumers 
have ‘lent their inﬂuence to low inﬂuence high dependency stakeholders such as 
supply chain workers in developing countries, future generations and animals,  
in order to focus corporate attention on issues such as supply chain labour 
conditions, environmental care and animal welfare. High
LowLow
Treat fairly  – honour commitments to  
these stakeholders in line with company 
policy, regulations and industry norms, 
otherwise endeavour to keep stakeholders 
satisﬁed insofar as balance of costs and 
beneﬁts allow.
Low priority   - provide access to general 
channels of information and feedback. High
Strategic  threat or opportunity - invest in 
engagement processes to understand 
concerns and develop solutions.
Keep  involved and informed , but ensure 
balance between the concerns of high 
inﬂuence stakeholders and those of people 
actually impacted by decisions. Stakeholder Inﬂuence and Dependancy Matrix
Stakeholder inﬂuence on organisation
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 43
Maturity of issue
Latent
Emerging
Consolidating
InstitutionalisedEvidence
Weak  scientiﬁc or other  
hard evidence.
Emerging  body of research,  
vbut no clear agreement on 
conclusions
Strong  evidence
Less focus on evidence:  
the case has been made and 
accepted.Awareness
Some  activist communities, 
academics and NGOs are  
aware of the issue.Little  
business community awareness.
Focus  of NGO campaigning, 
political and media awareness. 
Leading businesses are 
experimenting with  
approaches to dealing  
with the issue.
High level of general  
awareness of issue amongst 
relevant business, civil society  
and public bodies.
Addressing this issue is a normal 
part of a business-excellence 
model.Expectations
No regulation  or  
recognised standards for 
business.
Boundaries  of business 
responsibility subject of  
public debate.
Best practice approaches 
increasingly promoted and 
recognised. Voluntary  
standards are established  
and legislation may be  
proposed. 
Legislation or strong  
business norms are  
established.SUGGESTED METHODOLOGIES  M4:  
PRIORITISATING  STAKEHOLDERS AND ISSUES
The purpose of this activity is to identify which issues and/or stakeholders represent  
key priorities for engagement by your organisation. 
Decide whether to focus initially on prioritising by issues or stakeholders – this  
will depend on the context as outlined on p36 – If you have already determined 
which stakeholders you need to engage with, prioritise issues. If the engagement 
is issue driven, prioritise stakeholders. Otherwise be guided by whether you 
know more about the stakeholders or the issues.
In both cases convene a workshop of managers from across the departments and 
functions that are likely to be knowledgeable about the stakeholders and issues, 
be concerned about the outcomes of engagement or be responsible for 
implementing follow up action. You may also consider inviting outsiders with 
expertise relating  
to the issues or stakeholder groups involved.
Select a person either from inside or outside the company to facilitate.
you can use the objective, issue and stakeholder matrix (T1) a basis for 
discussion. 
Prioritising issues
Categorise the issues identiﬁed in the issue/stakeholder matrix as latent, 
emerging, consolidating or institutionalised according to the following criteria:P4: PRIORITISING STAKEHOLDERS AND ISSUES
Issue maturity ratingThink Strategically
STAGE 1
Discuss the objectives of your organisation in relation to the issues within each of 
the four categories of maturity, the risks and opportunities involved and the types 
of stakeholders that are relevant for this. Consider how to approach issues in each 
category and whether further prioritisation criteria are needed.
Use the issue maturity analysis to assign levels of priority or broad approaches to 
engagement to each of the issues.
Prioritising stakeholders 
Decide on prioritisation criteria for stakeholders. Inﬂuence, dependency and 
willingness to engage are good general starting points but you may also need to 
consider other more speciﬁc criteria.
Discuss and analyse how each stakeholder group rates against these criteria.
Plot stakeholders on the following grid using inﬂuence and dependency as the axes.– Remove, grant or inﬂuence ‘license to operate’ 
– Restrict access to resources, operating sites or intellectual capital 
– Damage or build company reputation 
– Contribute or detract from companies ability to learn and innovate
– Restrict or provide access to investment funds
–  Provide useful early warning signals about emerging issues and risks or cause  
distractions diverting management attention and time from core activities  
depending on the context of engagement may want to focus on some or all of  
these sources of inﬂuence.
– Direct  ﬁnancial dependence (e.g. who depend on you for wages, purchases, grants)
–  Indirect ﬁnancial dependence (e.g. whose livelihoods depend on you through your  
contributions to the regional economy, or for example low income customers who depend 
on low prices for basic goods which you may provide)
– Non-ﬁnancial dependence (e.g. those who depend on you for essential services)
–  Non-ﬁnancial impairment or risk from your operations (e.g. through air or noise pollution 
or from risk to health for consumers of your products)
–  Low/no choice (e.g. employees facing compulsory redundancy, neighbours to a 
production plant, addicts in the case of addictive products, consumers vulnerable due  
to illiteracy, etc)
– Adversarial / hostile
– Unknown
– Uninterested
– Engaged through formal mechanism (e.g. via governance, regulation, negotiation)
– Cooperative
– CompetitiveHigh impact  
stakeholder groups 
are those with the 
power to:
High dependency  
stakeholders are 
those who are in a 
position of:
The willingness  and 
ability of stakeholders 
to engage can be 
classiﬁed in various 
ways as appropriate:
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 45
Stakeholder  dependence on  company  
(or project, objective or business line...)High 
dependence
 - no choice
No direct  
impacts  -                    
stakeholders  
have 
broad  range  
of choiceNo Inﬂ  uence Low inﬂ  uence      Some inﬂ  uence Formal power/     
high inﬂ  uence Stakeholder inﬂ  uence on company (or objective, project or business line)SUMMARY TEMPLATE T4: STAKEHOLDER INFLUEN CE DEPEND ENC Y MATRI X*
Optional: illustrate relationships between stakeholders using arrows to show 
inﬂ  uence from one stakeholder to another.
Discuss the mapped results; consider how to approach stakeholders in each 
quadrant and whether further prioritisation criteria are needed.
Use the stakeholder analysis to assign levels of priority or broad approaches to 
engagement to each of the stakeholder groupsP4: PRIORITISING STAKEHOLDERS AND ISSUESThink Strategically
*electronic version downloadable at www.accountability.org.uk
STAGE 1
THINGS TO CONSIDER
You might decide to prioritise issues and then go on to prioritise stakeholders 
relevant to the high priority issues where stakeholder engagement is identiﬁed as 
necessary.
Issues may not be clearly within one of the four stages of maturity, but might 
have characteristics of diﬀerent stages. Often for example, public knowledge and 
concern is not in step with the state of evidence and scientiﬁc consensus.
Additional stakeholders and issues may emerge at any time, so the matrix and 
prioritisations should be continually updated to serve as a useful source of 
reference. 
KEY PRIORITIES
Sales, players and winners: 
Our sales performance, the introduction of new games and the playing and winning 
experience are critical to building a growing National Lottery, and are of direct interest to 
many of our stakeholders - the public and players, retailers, employees, pressure groups, 
suppliers and shareholders. 
Good Causes: 
Ensuring maximum returns to Good Causes and showing people the breadth of projects that 
The National Lottery has funded is critical to building a respected National Lottery, and is 
relevant to the public, retailers, community and shareholders. 
Our Future: 
The discussions focused on distribution of lottery funds, how the third licence to operate 
the lottery will be awarded and the changes in gambling regulation are critical to the future 
of The National Lottery. The outcome of these discussions will have a huge impact on all of 
our stakeholders - the public and players, employees, retailers, community, pressure groups, 
suppliers and shareholders.
Our people:  
The skills, motivation and commitment of our people are critical to our ability to deliver our 
strategic goal of building growth and respect. In addition, our people, and their behaviour and 
choices will directly inﬂuence our impact on the communities and environment in which we 
operate. This issue has particular bearing on our employees and shareholders. 
Responsible play: 
Ensuring the protection of vulnerable groups, such as young people, those on low incomes 
or those susceptible to gaming addiction is key to ensuring that The National Lottery is a 
respected institution, and is of importance to the public, retailers and pressure group s.Camelot's Integrated Prioritisation of Stakeholders and Issues
SECONDARY  PRIORITIES
Investment in retail: 
Giving our retail partners the support 
they need is important to building a 
growing National Lottery and is relevant 
to the public, retailers, community, 
pressure groups, our suppliers and 
shareholders. 
Our supply chain: 
We operate one of the most efﬁcient 
lotteries in the world. Value for money 
and shared integrity are important 
to enable us to operate efﬁciently 
and to ensure The National Lottery 
is respected. We are also mindful 
of the impact our suppliers have on 
the environment. These issues are 
particularly relevant to our suppliers 
and shareholders. 
Environment:
Camelot’s environmental performance 
and that of our suppliers is part of 
being a respected operator of The 
National Lottery. This area is relevant 
to our employees and environment 
stakeholders. 
Community Involvement: 
Camelot’s own contribution to the 
community is an integral part of being 
a respected operator, and is of key 
relevance to employees, pressure 
groups and community stakeholders.Based on their strategic objectives and organisational mission, Camelot the operator of the UK national lottery, has constructed a two-level 
prioritisation of stakeholders (see p 27 for Camelot’s stakeholder groups), where speciﬁc issues of importance are related to speciﬁc  
stakeholder groups. Below is an extract from their social report:  
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 47
ROUND UP
By the end of this Stage you should have an overall understanding of the relationship 
between your overall business strategy and stakeholders, and deﬁned related strategic 
objectives for engagement. However, be aware that your understanding will have to 
be veriﬁed by your stakeholders. You will also have mapped the key groups of people 
who are aﬀected by and can aﬀect the way your organisation meets its goals, as well as 
the potential issues relevant to each stakeholder group. You will also have established 
priorities regarding the stakeholders and issues that you will intend to address.
Outputs
       Strategic Engagement Objectives 
       Objectives, Issues & Stakeholder matrix
       In itial prioritisation of stakeholders and/or issues STAGE 1 REVIEWThink Strategically
There is always an element of ‘learning on the job’ and opportunism with  
stakeholder engagement. Companies often start engaging with stakeholders they 
already know well, and then start talking to others outside of their traditional 
comfort zone. Others start by responding to a particular crisis or opportunity.  
The stakeholder engagement process itself is a learning cycle as both the company 
and its stakeholders learn more about each other’s motivations, ways of working  
and spheres of inﬂuence.
However, this does not mean that stakeholder engagement cannot and should 
not be planned in the same way that other business activities are planned. 
Without good planning stakeholder engagement processes are unlikely to 
deliver where it counts for the business.  Instead it may end in disappointment, 
recriminations and damaged relationships with the people that you have already 
recognised as essential to your organisation’s successAnalyse and Plan
PURPOSE
The aim of this Stage is to collect information and develop a plan of action 
based on your strategic engagement priorities and current abilities.STAGE 2
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 49
Analyse and Plan
PRINCIPLES
The key principles that this Stage intends to deliver on are materiality  
and completeness.
  
 
PROCESS
The actions and tools outlined in this Stage take you through four linked 
questions to help develop a plan of action for engagement based on a clear 
understanding of the expectation gaps between your organisation, its 
stakeholders and peers as well as the changes and resources that might be 
necessary to close these gaps.   
This will help you to develop a strategically aligned, resource-eﬃcient approach 
to engagement and to initiate the process of internal learning and engagement of 
key departments and individuals needed to make stakeholder engagement more 
than just talk.
You will want to develop a clear idea of:
• How the issues that you have prioritised so far are currently managed within  
 your organisation;
•  How you are currently engaging with stakeholders on these issues;
• What others are doing, and with whom you could collaborate;
• What you can and want to do about the speciﬁc issues;
• Which speciﬁc stakeholder representatives you want to engage with, and  
 what they expect.
This Stage is outlined in ﬁve steps that can be used as a process for collecting the 
information you need for successful stakeholder engagement. But the individual 
elements and associated tools can also be used within your existing management 
and planning processes where stakeholder engagement is seen as an integral part  
of achieving discrete business objectives.'Inclusivity'
Principles"Considering  the stakeholders'  interests  in organisational  decision  making'"
Means here:  Collecting and analysing furth er information from within and out side of the 
organisation to enable the busi ness to make an inform ed decision on what the mat erial issues  
and stake holder are, and these can be addressed adequately.Responsiveness Completeness Materiality
STAGE 2
Stage 1: Think strategically about stakeholder 
engagement
Strategic objecti ves and list of 
priority stakeholders and/or 
issues
Stage 2: Analyse and Plan
Where do we want 
to go with our 
stakeholders?Stakeholder 
Representative 
Proﬁles & Priorities
Organisational 
and Stakeholder 
Development Plan
Resource 
commitments 
& margins of 
movementHow are others  
addressing this 
issue
Where are we now?
What are our 
stakeholders'
expectations?
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 51
Analyse and Plan
BACKGROUND
Before planning a stakeholder engagement process it is essential to know where 
you already are on the material issues in question: 
•  How is the issue currently managed within your organisation?
•  What policies and systems do you already have in place? 
•  What is it that you can and want to do about these issues?
This information provides the practical basis for building more robust and 
responsive stakeholder engagement processes, but also the basis on which to 
assess your current practice against your objectives and against the level of 
maturity of the issues in question.
An organisation’s stakeholder engagement practice in relation to an individual 
issue can be characterised within the following ﬁve stages of development  
(see below) .5 
No engagement on an issue No Engagement
Exploratory
Developing
Embedded
StrategicOrganisational Learning Stages
Ad-hoc engagement with stakeholders when opportunities or challenges arise: focused  
on learning and exploring the issue and often dependent on individual commitment. 
Good quality engagement processes with some thought to design and stakeholder 
needs, but management systems are patchy, the impact of engagements to actual 
operational decision making is unclear, and there are no clearly established 
performance objectives addressing the issue.
High quality engagement processes feed into operational decision making and are 
embedded in core management processes. Engagement is systematised to ensure that 
the issue is adequately addressed.
High quality engagement embedded in management and governance processes and 
linked to business strategy. Issues are addressed in-depth, often with the objective of 
systemic change and on a global and local level.
These organisational responses can then be compared to the maturity of an 
issue, which you have already assessed in Stage 1. This is the purpose of the Issue 
Response Matrix opposite:
 
5 This model aligns with the value cre ation model pre sented in "Volume 1. The Guide to Practitioners' Perspectives", on p.27.P5: REVIEWING YOUR PROGRESS
STAGE 2
LATENT  EMERGING CONSOLIDATING INSTITUTIONALISEDSTRATEGIC
EMBEDDED
DEVELOPING
EXPLORATORYOrganisational 
Response
Social Maturity of an IssueHigher 
Opportunity Green
Zone
Risky Red Zone
The issue response matrix guides you in comparing your company’s way of 
dealing with an issue with the maturity of debate about it within society more 
broadly. It thereby helps you to identify where you are in a leadership position 
and where you are at risk. On the other hand, it also helps you to identify where 
you might want to be in relation to an issue under consideration. C
B
A
Example Application for the Issue Response Matrix: Child Labour in the Supply Chain  
There is widespread consensus amongst citizens, consumers, business and governments that children should not be forced to work long 
hours in jobs that sacriﬁce their health, safety and education. 141 countries have ratiﬁed the ILO Minimum Age Convention and 153 have 
ratiﬁed the ILO Worst Forms of Child Labour Convention. Most of these countries have legislation on their statute books aimed at ending 
child labour and many have programmes to combat child labour often with technical or ﬁnancial support from the ILO or international 
donors. A number of industry associations, NGOs and multi-sector initiatives are also working to address the issue, voluntary guidance for 
buyers have been developed, and many businesses are working to improve the management and monitoring systems which help avoid 
child labour within their supply chains. It can be considered a consolidated issue. 
Yet the ILO estimates that 1 in 6 children is at work instead of at school and three-quarters of these are involved in hazardous work. 
Amongst companies whose operations and sourcing networks extend into countries and sectors where child labour is endemic, different 
levels of response can be seen.
•   The business which is still developing its basic policies, where any information it gains about child labour in its supply chain does not  
 necessarily feed into operational decision making processes, and where there are no performance objectives, would locate its response  
 at A. Here, the business is vulnerable to advocacy and brand damage, unprepared for potential regulation, and other businesses  
 leading on the issue may shy away from collaborating with it.
•   A business which has systematic management and monitoring processes, policies, targets and ongoing engagement initiatives with  
 suppliers in place to address and minimise child-labour in its own supply chain would locate its issue response at B and can consider  
 itself to be in-step with societal development. 
•  A business which has developed sophisticated organisational policies and management systems on the issue, has assigned top-level  
 responsibility for avoiding child-labour, and is engaged with a wider range of stakeholders such as industry bodies, governments, NGOs  
 and the ILO in initiatives to solve the associated challenges, could locate its response at C. This strategic approach might give this  
 company the opportunity to proﬁle itself as a particularly responsible business in the marketplace and with regulators.The Issue Response Matrix
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 53
Analyse and Plan
P5: REVIEWING YOUR PROGRESS
SUGGESTED METHODOLOGY M5:  
ASSESSING YOUR CURRENT ORGANISATIONAL RESPONSE
The purpose of this activity is to establish a clearer picture of the degree and 
mechanisms that the business currently has in place to address speciﬁc issues. It involves 
an assessment of current processes of management and stakeholder engagement in 
relation to the issue, and helps you to identify areas for improvement. 
• Using the Template 5 (below) as guidance, investigate what level of   
 development your organisation has reached in relation to each of your   
 prioritised issues, and note any particular areas where organisational response  
 enablers are weak in relation to a particular issue. The Template guides you in  
 doing this and helps to capture the results of this assessment. 
•  Chart issues on Issue/Response matrix (above) to highlight those areas   
 where you fall into the red risk zone or green opportunity zone. 
•  Identify target levels of development for speciﬁc aspects of your approach to  
  prioritised issues or stakeholder map.
• Finally, consider the ﬁnancial resources that may be required for engagement,  
 as well as for the possible outcomes of engagement. Are key budget holders  
 committed to supporting this process? Is it clear to which degree ﬁnancial  
 resources will be made available?
THINGS TO CONSIDER
• This process should draw on sources of expertise throughout the company,  
 including aspects of stakeholder management processes already documented  
 in policies and guidelines as well as through interviews, workshops or meetings  
 with key individuals within the company.
•  The “current engagement activities” row should ideally be considered in   
 conjunction with the analysis of current engagement undertaken described on  
 p63.
The different rows of this table help you to assess whether your business’ current management systems / policies and processes  
are adequate for the maturity of the issue in question. 
If all of your responses are 1, your organisation is in a good position to respond to the issue in a strategic  manner. 
If your answers are all 2, then your business response can be considered as embedded . 
If all answers are equal to 3, then the current processes are  developing . 
Answers of 4 indicate an exploratory  approach. Finally if the majority of responses are 5, this indicates that your company is  
not addressing the issue.
Consider your organisational response in light of the maturity of the issue – are you a leader or a laggard in relation to this issue?  
How does this relate to your strategic objectives and assessment of risks and opportunities in this area?   
Highlight areas for improvement in the ﬁnal row.Explanation to Template T5
STAGE 2
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 551. Formal commitments in place with responsibility at board level.
2. Formal commitments with responsibility at senior management level 
3. Formal statement or policies made but no formal responsibility at senior levels.  
4. Action to address issue driven by individual commitment and awareness.
5. No awareness/action.
Give details: __________________________________________________________SUMMARY  TEMPLATE  T5: 
ASSESSMENT OF ORGANISATIONAL ABIL ITY TO RESPOND TO AN ISSUE*
Governance and 
management 
commitment to issueLatent
Policy regarding the 
issue1. Formal policy with objectives that are linked to business strategy.
2. Formal policy with objectives that are not linked to business strategy. 
3. Draft or holding policy but no objectives.
4. Early discussions about policy.
5. No policy.
Give details: __________________________________________________________
Current engagement 
activities regarding 
the issue1. Formalised and integrated into management and governance processes with robust documentation and 
reporting systems.
2. Systematised engagement approach with documentation and some linkage into decision making processes.
3. Established engagement processes for some relevant stakeholders/ issues.
4. Sporadic engagement processes, limited internal controls.
5. No engagement.
Give details: __________________________________________________________
Performance 
indicators/
measurements 
regarding the issue1. Strategic objectives and SMART Key Performance Indicators (KPIs) set in order to meet management and 
stakeholders’ information needs. Internal and external reporting and assurance mechanisms in place.
2. KPIs that respond only to internal management needs, internal reporting with little or no assurance.  
3. KPIs that only partially meet stakeholder information needs. 
4. Early discussions relating to development of KPIs and monitoring.
5. No objectives set, no Key Performance Indicators.
Give details: __________________________________________________________
Internal 
responsibility and 
competency to 
address the issue 1. Issue related targets form part of the performance reviews of individuals, and are considered when deciding 
 on potential performance rewards. 
2. Required competencies are addressed in recruitment and training, and considered in the rewarding of performance.
3. Responsibilities assigned  but no formal mechanisms to reward, recruit or train  to ensure  required competency.
4. Early discussions relating to assignment of responsibilities and understanding of necessary competencies. 
5. No internal responsibility considered for this issue/ stakeholder
Give details: __________________________________________________________
Review  and learning 
processes in regards 
to the issue1. Continuous review and learning to innovate and adapt organisational policy and processes, with learning 
from engagements feeding into the organisation’s strategic decision making.
2. Review and learning processes generate limited changes relating to speciﬁ  c issues and departmental 
functions. Organisational change management is starting to establish links with stakeholder analysis.
3. Ad hoc review and learning processes leading to incremental changes.  
4. Review and learning processes driven and limited to individuals.
5. No stakeholder engagement happening on this issue.
Give details: __________________________________________________________EnablerEmerging Consolidated InstitutionalisedSocial maturity of the issue:
Possible levels of actionPrioritised Issue:
(Example 1: re Performance measurements and indicators: “KPIs that provide internal guidance to managing the issue need to be developed.” )
(Example 2: re Review and learning processes: “Need to establish continuous review and learning processes so that we can adapt organisational 
policies and processes in response to stakeholder expectations and organisational needs.” )Overall adequacy of your ability to respond / areas which require improvement:
Which improvements are required in the 6 areas (rows) given above?
*electronic version downloadable at www.accountability.org.uk
Analyse and Plan
BACKGROUND
It is always worth knowing what others are doing in relation to similar issues  
and/or stakeholder groups. Which challenges have they encountered and how 
have they achieved success? What can you learn from them? Where there is 
evidence of positive outcomes of stakeholder engagement on a particular issue  
or in a particular part of the business? Are there ongoing partnership initiatives or 
associations addressing this issue where working together would be beneﬁcial?
Your approach to stakeholder engagement does also not have to be developed 
from scratch. Indeed in many cases it may turn out that the issues identiﬁed as 
material cannot be addressed by an individual business working alone or 
bilaterally with some of its stakeholders but may call for sector-wide or multi-
sector action. Stakeholder engagement involves a cycle of learning and 
innovation within the organisation, but it can also be part of a wider cycle of  
‘civil learning and action’ both about how to do stakeholder engagement and  
how to address the issues raised. This cycle of learning is accelerated when 
organisations can learn from the mistakes and best practice of others.  
Increasingly such learning is facilitated though networks and partnerships and 
the development of resources in the form of case studies, tools and standards to 
enable lessons to be transferred from one organisation to another.
The table below provides sources for ‘inspiration’ on what you could do to 
address the issues and stakeholders that you have found:P6: LEARNING FROM OTHERS AND IDENTIFYING POTENTIAL PARTNERS
STAGE 2
Examples Information SourceLinks into Learning Networks6 
• ISO 14001 (environmental management system standard)
• International Labour Organisation (ILO) Standards 
• SA8000 Labour Standard
• Business Principles for Countering Bribery (from TI and SA International)
• OECD Guidelines for Multinational Enterprises
• Global Reporting Initiative Sustainability Reporting Guidelines
• AA1000 Series (quality framework for organisational accountability)
•  The Sigma Guidelines ( www.projectsigma.com )
• The Stakeholder Engagement Manual: Volume 1 – “The Guide to Practitioners’   
 Perspectives on Stakeholder Engagement”, Stakeholder Research Associates,  
 UNEP, AccountAbility
• CSR-Case Studies on  www.wbcsd.org  (World Business Council for SD) and on  
 www.conversations-with-disbelievers.net
•  ‘Making Stakeholder Engagement Work’ www.csrcampaign.org  
• ‘Risk & Opportunity: Best Practice in Non-Financial Reporting’ UNEP /   
 SustainAbility www.sustainability.com
• Business  & Economic  Development  sector  speciﬁc  reports www.economicfootprint.org 
• Industry as a Partner for Sustainable Development, 22 industry sector reports   
 prepared for the 2002 Johannesburg Summit (WSSD)  
 www.unep.fr/outreach/wssd/contributions/sector_reports/reports.htm 
• Dow Jones Sustainability Index
• Accountability Rating 2005
• FTSE4Good
• Business in the Community Corporate Responsibility Index
Conferences, events and business networks on relevant issues showcase best practice 
and provide opportunities to meet with others facing the same issues.
Sustainability reports are good ﬁrst source of reference :
• www.globalreporting.org (reports categorised according to use of GRI Guidelines)
• www.corporateregister.com (online-database for non-ﬁnancial reports)
Collaborations between companies, civil society and governments range from global to 
sector, region, or issue-speciﬁc initiatives:
• United Nations Global Compact
• UNEP associated voluntary initiatives, eg UNEP Finance Initiative, Global  
 e-Sustainability Initiative, Tour Operators Initiative, Mobility Forum, Advertising and  
 Communications Forum www.unep.fr/outreach/home.htm  
• Sector speciﬁc initiatives of the World Business Concil for Sustainable Development  
 (WBCSD) , see “Sector Projects” www.wbcsd.org  
• Issue-based and industry associations, for example Fair Labour Association,   
 International Council on Mining and Metals, International Petroleum Industry   
 Environmental Conservation Association (IPIECA) (see examples of activities of 19  
 associations at www.unep.fr/outreach/business/best_practice.htm  )
• (Sub)Region speciﬁc initiatives for example the Calabash Project for the SADC region  
 (see www.saiea.com/calabash )Codes, Standards, Frameworks, 
Guidelines and Tools 
provide principle-based or step-by-step 
guidance for action, as well as providing 
a benchmark for your own activities.
Case-Studies, Best-Practice and 
Research Reports 
can provide inspiration when thinking 
about your own approach, and ensure 
that you learn from the experiences  
(and mistakes) of others.
Benchmarks and Indexes 
point you towards competitors or peers 
with advanced practices. Use them to get 
a relative perspective on your activities.
Competitors & other individual 
companies who face similar issues
can be a rich source of information.  
They may even be willing to collaborate 
on issues with you.
Partnerships, Industry Associations, 
NGOs
can be a powerful and efﬁcient way to 
address issues. At the same time, such 
associations are also often a good source 
of information.  
6 See annex for more examples.
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 57
Analyse and Plan
SUGGESTED METHODOLOGY M6:  
LEARNING FROM OTHERS
The purpose of this activity is to identify the most relevant sources of learning as well as 
some potential partners for engagement. 
Identify peers, partnerships, networks, tools and standards relevant to the 
prioritised issues or stakeholder groups. Use the table above to guide you in  
your search.
Questions to ask while considering this information
• What have other organisations done in order to engage with similar stakeholders  
 or to address similar issues? 
• Which mistakes can we learn from, which practice has proven to be successful?
• Which standards and frameworks oﬀer relevant guidance?
• How have others turned challenges into opportunities?
• Are these initiatives credible from the perspective of my important stakeholder  
 groups?
Consider likely areas for engagement with peers, for example in the form of formal 
or informal networks, by signing up to shared codes of conduct or principles  
(e.g. the UN Global Compact), or by joining or forming partnership initiatives  
to address an issue.
Create an electronic or hardcopy ﬁle where you collect relevant case-studies, 
documents, portraits of organisations, initiatives and standards for future reference. 
Reference the most interesting ones in Summary Template 9 (p74).
THINGS TO CONSIDER
When looking for learning from others, you can also make use of the information 
you have already collected for the materiality test in Stage 1 (p36). You may also 
reconsider the results of that materiality test in light of any new information that 
you may ﬁnd.P6: LEARNING FROM OTHERS AND IDENTIFYING POTENTIAL PARTNERS
P7: ASSESSING YOUR CURRENT ENGAGEMENTS AND DRAFTING STAKEHOLDER SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
BACKGROUND
In addition to ﬁnding out about your internal organisational ability to address 
an issue, and to learning from what others are doing, it is of course essential to 
ﬁnd out how you are currently engaging with your stakeholders on your material 
issues. In essence you want to consider the following questions: 
• How are you currently engaging on your prioritised issues?
• How do you need to improve your engagement and what kind of results are  
 you seeking?
Your approach to stakeholder engagement can be characterised at a number of 
levels from passive/no engagement to empowering stakeholders to take decisions. STAGE 2
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 59
Analyse and Plan
7 See also the complementary Figure 1.3 in Volume 1: “The Guide to Practitioners’ Perspectives on Stakeholder Engagement”, p. 14P7: ASSESSING YOUR CURRENT ENGAGEMENTS AND DRAFTING STAKEHOLDER SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
Communication LevelLevels of Engagement 7
Remain Passive
Monitor
Inform
Transact
Consult
Involve
Collaborate
EmpowerNo goal.  
No  engagement.
Monitor stakeholders’ 
views.
Inform or educate 
stakeholders.
Work together in a 
contractual relationship 
where one partner 
directs the objectives and 
provides funding.Goal
No active communication
One-way: stakeholder to 
company.
One-way: company to 
stakeholder, there is no 
invitation to reply.
Limited two-way: setting  
and monitoring 
performance according to 
terms of contract.
Limited two-way: company 
asks questions and the 
stakeholders answer.
Two-way, or multi-way 
between company and 
stakeholders. Learning 
takes place on both 
sides.  Stakeholders and 
company take action 
individually.
Two-way, or multi-way 
between company/ies and 
stakeholders.  Learning, 
negotiation, and decision 
making on both sides. 
Stakeholders work 
together to take action.Nature of relationship
No relationship
No relationship
Short  or long term relation-  
ship with stakeholders.
"We will keep you informed."
Relationship  terms  set by 
contractual  agreement .  
“We will do what we said we 
would”  or “we will provide  the 
resources  to enable  you to do 
what we agree”.Engagement Approaches
Stakeholder concern expressed 
through protest, letters, media, web- 
sites etc., or pressure on regulatory 
bodies and other advocacy efforts.
Media and internet tracking.  
Second-hand reports from other 
stakeholders possibly via targeted 
interviews.
‘Public Private partnerships’  
and Private Finance Initiatives, 
Grant-making, cause related 
marketing .
Surveys. Focus Groups. Workplace 
assessments. One-to-one meetings. 
Public meetings and workshops.
Standing stakeholder advisory  
forums . On-line feedback and  
discussion.
Multi-stakeholder forums.  
Advisory panels. Consensus 
building processes.  
Participatory decision  
making processes.
Joint projects, voluntary 
two-party or multi-stakeholder 
Initiatives, Partnerships.
Integration of Stakeholders into 
Governance Structure. (eg. as 
members, s hareholders or on 
particul ar committees etc.)Bulletins and letters. Brochures, 
reports and websites. Speeches, 
conference and public presentations. 
Open houses and facility tours. Road 
shows and public displays. Press 
releases, press conferences, media 
advertising , lobbying.
Gain information 
and feedback from 
stakeholders to inform 
decisions made 
internally.
Work directly with 
stakeholders to ensure 
that their concerns are 
fully understood and 
considered in decision 
making.
Partner with or 
convene a network 
of stakeholders to 
develop mutually 
agreed solutions and 
joint plan of action.
Delegate decision-
making on a particular 
issue to stakeholders.Short-  or long-term  involvement . 
"We will keep you informed,  
listen  to your concerns,  consider  
your insights,  and provide  
feedback  on our decision."
May be one-off  or longer-term  
engagement.  "We will work 
with you to ensure  that your 
concerns  are understood,  to 
develop  alternative  proposals  
and to provide  feedback  
about  how stakeholders  views  
inﬂuenced  the decision  making  
process”.
Long-  term. "We will look to 
you for direct  advice  and 
participation  in finding  and 
implementing  solutions  to 
shared  challenges.”  
Long-ter m."We will implement  
what you  
decide.”New organisational 
forms of accountability: 
stakeholders have formal 
role in governance of an 
organisation or decisions 
are delegated out to 
stakeholders.
STAGE 2
DIFFERENT LEVELS OF ENGAGEMENT –  
DIFFERENT MAGNITUDES OF CHANGE
In general, low level engagements such as monitoring or informing may 
be considered as adequate for solving or addressing minor challenges to 
stakeholder and corporate behaviour and strategy, while engaging at a higher 
level has the potential to enable bigger changes and transformation, and the 
solving of more systematic and deep-rooted challenges in managing corporate 
impacts or sustainability issues.
However, this does not mean that, for example, providing information to your 
stakeholders can not lead to signiﬁcant changes in your relationship with them 
and in their behaviour. In fact, eﬀective engagements are usually a combination 
of approaches from diﬀerent levels, and informing is an essential part of most 
higher-level engagements like consultation or collaboration.
Important Note:  The ‘ﬁrst’ three modes (passive, monitor, inform) are not 
really engagements as such, as real engagement is interactive. However, they are 
often the ﬁrst steps in a relationship with stakeholders and can lead on to more 
involved engagement. 
A key diﬀerence between the low levels and the high levels of engagement is the 
degree to which you pool resources (knowledge, human resources, operation 
capacities, ﬁnances or inﬂuence on others) in order to achieve a shared 
objective. In general, the more fundamental the transformation is that you 
and your stakeholders want to make happen, the more important it is that 
you work together closely and make the best use of each others resources. 
For example, if you simply want to address your stakeholders’ concerns 
resulting from their lack of knowledge about the health implications of one 
of your products, informing them may be suﬃcient. However, if you want to 
develop a company policy that successfully serves as a guideline to developing 
all products in a way that addresses stakeholders health concerns, then you may 
have to consult more thoroughly with a number of stakeholders (e.g. internal 
research and development vs. customers) in order to make sure that the policy 
meets the diﬀerent expectations. Finally, if you want to encourage your whole 
industry to address consumer health issues in its products and marketing then 
you will have to collaborate with an even broader number of stakeholders (e.g. 
industry and consumer associations, governments, industry peers) – and often 
on a higher level – in order to make this happen. The level of and approaches 
to engagement that you and your stakeholders choose therefore depend 
on your strategic engagement objectives, i.e. on whether these imply only 
incremental or systemic changes, and also on the social maturity of the 
issue.  If an issue is still ‘latent’, monitoring stakeholders may be a suﬃcient 
reaction, but if an issue is consolidated and likely to become institutionalised, it 
is important to collaborate with a broad range of stakeholders to make sure that 
the issue is addressed thoroughly.
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 61
Analyse and Plan
Philips' Stakeholders and Main Engagement Approaches
The table below illustrates some of the ways in which the Dutch electronics company Philips engages different stakeholders.
Stakeholder
Economic Stakeholders
Customers
Employees
Suppliers/business partners 
Mainstream investors
Financial service providers Social  investors
Social Stakeholders
Communities
Local/national/international
Non-governmental organisations
Academia
Media• (B2C) Surveys (trend related, customer satisfaction related, application research),   
 complaint resolution. Focus groups,
• (B2B) Advisory boards, co-R&D, co-strategy development
• Employee Engagement surveys, town hall meetings, People Performance system,   
 compliance system, (local) ombudsman
• Supplier days (local, global), co-R&D, industry membership (e.g. WBCSD)
• Road shows, analyst (face to face) meetings, ratings
• Surveys
• Ongoing ad hoc involvement, ﬁnancial ratings
• Social investment activities focused on education and health, local networking
• Local networking (business/community driven). Participation regulatory bodies  
 in advisory bodies, cooperation in community projects
• Surveys, project development, ad hoc involvement
• Co-R&D, exchange programs, local networking
• Local networking, surveysMain Means of InteractionP7: ASSESSING YOUR CURRENT ENGAGEMENTS AND DRAFTING STAKEHOLDER SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
STAGE 2
SUGGESTED METHODOLOGY M7:  
ASSESSING YOUR CURRENT ENGAGEMENTS AND DRAFTING 
STAKEHOLDER SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
The purpose of this activity is to identify the ways in which you are currently engaging 
with the relevant stakeholders on the material issues that you have prioritised, and 
at the same time to start thinking if and how you want to develop these relationships 
further. The outcomes help to ﬁll in the stakeholder assessment T emplate (T emplate 6), 
and feed into further decisions. 
Conduct a workshop or have a series of internal discussions with those 
involved in managing stakeholder relationships.  Get together with the people 
(e.g. procurement-manager, customer relations, external aﬀairs, etc.) within your 
company who are currently dealing with internal and external stakeholders on the 
issues prioritised. Explore the current relationship with them, and how  
these relate to the issues that you have identiﬁed regarding the speciﬁc 
stakeholder group.
Discuss the possibilities for engagement with these stakeholders.   
Is the current combination of approaches to engaging with them suﬃcient 
to address the issues in a satisfactory way?  Does it require other engagement 
approaches, maybe on a diﬀerent level? Would the stakeholders actually have 
the capacity (e.g. human and other resources, global presence) to take part in a 
diﬀerent approach to engagement?
Formulate simple Stakeholder Speciﬁc Objectives  that relate to the issues and 
stakeholders – considering the possible levels of engagement -  using sentences like:
• “To make sure they are well informed of our approach to XXX”
•  “To ensure that they do not become hostile to us.”
•  “To be aware of their actions regarding …”
•  “To convince them to…”
•  “To make sure our policy on XXX meets their expectations.”
•  “To share responsibility with them for…”
For some stakeholders, you may wish to formulate several objectives. Be sure that 
these are aligned with your overall strategic engagement objectives for the issues 
that you are engaging on.
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 63
Analyse and Plan
Document outcomes of the conversation in T emplate 8.   
Note the issue that you are engaging on, the current ‘owner’ of the relationship, 
the history of the engagement, the current level and approaches in the Template, 
as well as potential future levels and approaches. You can either do this for whole 
stakeholder groups, or ideally already for speciﬁc representatives – whatever seems 
most appropriate to your situation.
Use your conversations to consider ‘speciﬁcations’ of further stakeholder 
representatives that you feel you need to identify in order to address your 
priority issues.  Again, Template 8 – as well as the next step – provides you with  
an overview of a range of further factors you may wish to consider.
THINGS TO CONSIDER
It is important to be aware that you are not yet taking any ﬁnal decisions  
on how you will be proceeding with these stakeholders, this will happen in  
Stage 4.  This is still an initial assessment, and helps you to gain a deeper 
understanding of the adequacy of current engagements, as well as of the potential 
for ‘more’. This also means that the ﬁlling in of Template 8 is only preliminary, 
you must reconsider your entries as you learn more about your stakeholders 
throughout the engagement process. The T emplate should be used as a 
constantly evolving documentation of your stakeholder relationships.   
If for any reason you feel you do not have enough information to ﬁll in parts of  
the Template, just leave them blank. You may return to them later. The next step 
will also guide you in learning more about your stakeholders .
The activities described above partly overlap with the next step of assessing 
stakeholder representatives. Where possible, you may wish to combine the two and 
address them in the same conversations and/or workshops.P7: ASSESSING YOUR CURRENT ENGAGEMENTS AND DRAFTING STAKEHOLDER SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES
P8: UNDERSTANDING AND LEARNING ABOUT STAKEHOLDERS AND THEIR REPRESENTATIVES
8 See box 4.2, p.53 in Volume 1: “The Guide to Practitioners’ Perspectives on Stakeholder Engagement” for further clarifying examples.BACKGROUND
In order to design stakeholder engagement processes that work, you need 
a clear understanding of who your stakeholders are and how and why they 
may want to engage with you.
In some cases you will need to engage directly with stakeholders themselves either 
as a self-selected or statistically representative sample. In other cases you will 
want to engage with stakeholders’ formal or informal representatives in the form 
of opinion leaders, elected representatives, community leaders or advocacy or 
membership organisations.
This section will introduce a more detailed assessment of stakeholders. It will also 
include guidance on the selection of appropriate stakeholder representatives to 
engage with. 
Speciﬁcally important points to consider are the geographical scales at which 
the stakeholder representatives operate and their relationship to the level at 
which any outcomes may have to be implemented. For example, in engagements 
regarding the global issue of climate change, many of the organisations 
representing stakeholders’ viewpoints are themselves large global organisations, 
who may not always have the necessary insights into the expectations of local 
level stakeholders. In such cases, it is important to ensure that dialogues on 
a more local level with local stakeholders are also undertaken which then 
complement, feed into and verify the outputs of the global dialogue. 8     
When learning more about stakeholder representatives, the following factors 
should be considered:STAGE 2
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 65
Analyse and Plan
Stakeholders will have their own speciﬁc view regarding an issue, about potential 
problems, their causes and solutions. Furthermore, stakeholders investing time in 
engaging with you will expect a ‘return on investment’ in terms of action and response. 
Try and be as clear as possible about both, the stakeholders’ general view on the issue, 
and their expectations towards you. Some stakeholders only expect you to have an open 
and honest conversation with them, others may expect you to make speciﬁc operational 
changes or adhere to a certain set of performance standards.
Compare the expectations to what you think you can and want to actually do about an 
issue, given your resources and strategic objectives (these ‘margins of movement’ are 
further considered in the next step.)
 
Be clear about the representative’s knowledge of the issue. Some stakeholders know as 
much or even more about an issue than you. In such cases, you may wish to learn from 
them. Others know far less, and you may want to inform or educate them. This may be 
particularly important if their actions can have a strong direct or indirect impact on you, 
for example when they inﬂuence public policy regarding the issue.
When engaging with an individual or an organisation you are often seeking for them 
to stand as representative of a larger group of stakeholders. Be clear about any 
assumptions or claims about who a representative speaks for. Are they an elected 
or recognised representative? Do they have legitimacy in terms of broad support or 
acknowledged expertise? Or are you seeking a representative sample opinion from 
individuals who reﬂect the broader make-up of the community?
 
Successful engagement requires willingness on both sides. If there is unwillingness, 
it is advisable to investigate the reasons for this. Sometimes, this may be due to 
circumstances which you can control and change. In other times, it is important to 
acknowledge the stakeholders’ right not to engage. 
 
Be clear about the speciﬁc possible impacts of the stakeholder on your business.  
How can s/he contribute to your objectives? How can s/he stop you from achieving them? 
When doing this, you also need to consider her/his indirect impacts on you via other 
stakeholders. 
Some representatives’ potential impacts on you or on the stakeholder engagement 
process may be so signiﬁcant that there is a deﬁnite necessity to engage them. 
Consider the speciﬁc cultural circumstances of the engagement, e.g. language, customs 
regarding social interaction, gender issues. This may be very relevant to the methods 
you choose for engagement, as well as to the resource implications. The consideration 
of cultural issues should ideally be undertaken together with someone familiar with that 
culture, whether from within or outside the organisation. 
 
The geographical scale at which the representative operates, or is willing to operate, 
should match your engagement plans and objectives. Do you need someone who 
can engage on a global issue (e.g climate change)? This would require that the 
representative organisation possesses a signiﬁcant degree of credibility, legitimacy 
and oversight for this (e.g. WWF). An issue like the environmental considerations in the 
building of a new plant, however, is for example more competently addressed with the 
local administration and/or community.
 
Stakeholders must be treated as a scarce resource, which includes the respectful 
treatment of their attention and time. Smaller organisations may have very limited 
ﬁnancial means and stafﬁng capacity. See Stage 3 for further considerations on 
stakeholder capacities. 
If you are intending to engage with different stakeholders at the same time, or maybe 
even involve them in the same activity or locality, it is important to understand their 
views of and relationships with each other. Tension between your stakeholders can, 
especially if they are not considered, have very negative inﬂuences on the outcomes of 
your engagements with them.Stakeholder Proﬁle - Key Issues
Stakeholders’ expectations
Knowledge of the issue  
Legitimacy of stakeholder 
representative 
Willingness to engage
Possible impacts (negative or positive) 
of the representative
Cultural context
Geographical scale at which  
they operate
Stakeholders’ engagement capacity
Relationships of stakeholders with  
each otherP8: UNDERSTANDING AND LEARNING ABOUT STAKEHOLDERS AND THEIR REPRESENTATIVES
STAGE 2
Novozymes' Partnerships in China:
Expanding a company’s business activities into China brings unique challenges, especially for companies from the western 
hemisphere. The different cultural, economic and regulatory environment in China poses unique challenges. Also, China faces 
huge pressure in balancing economic growth with environmental and social development. Danish biotech company Novozymes has 
taken cooperative approaches to managing such challenges and to make the most of the Chinese business environment.  
For example, Novozymes has teamed up with various Chinese and foreign businesses to set up the China Business Council for 
Sustainable Development (CBCSD) in January, and currently holds the vice presidency. This gives Novozymes in the opportunity of 
understanding the link between economic growth and sustainable development in China. Novozymes and all of the other involved 
companies have undertaken to promote sustainable business practice in China. The CBCSD is afﬁliated to the World Business 
Council on Sustainable Development.
Another example are Novozymes various partnerships with Chinese universities. These help Novozymes to draw on China’s 
longstanding tradition in microbiology. In practice, this often involves Chinese students from e.g. Yunnan University in Southern 
China working together with researchers in Novozymes’ laboratories. Novozymes also invites customers to work with them to 
increase knowledge of different enzymes and allow them to inﬂuence the development of solutions to meet their needs. In the 
longer term, Novozymes expects these engagements with customers and universities to help identify completely new enzyme 
applications that are directly suitable for the large Asian market.
SUGGESTED METHODOLOGY M8:  
BUILDING STAKEHOLDER PROFILES
The purpose of this activity is to build up proﬁles of stakeholder representatives, their 
expectations, preferred levels of engagement, and their potential impacts.
Identify potential representatives for the stakeholder groups that you have 
identiﬁed.
• Consider the stakeholders you are already engaging with (identiﬁed in  
 previous step), and those that you have come across in your previous research  
 and analysis.
• You also have the option of ‘spreading the word’ that you are looking for   
 engagement partners as wide as possible. You may want to launch articles in  
 industry or issue speciﬁc magazines – asking stakeholders who are willing to  
 engage to approach you. This pre-empts the criticism that you are only dealing  
 with ‘the same old stakeholders representatives’ who never push you hard.  
 However, if you do this, make sure you have the resources to at least reply to all  
 stakeholders that approach you. 
Use the table above as guidance in learning as much as you can about the 
stakeholder representatives. Visit their websites, read their reports, investigate 
others’ opinions. Talk to people internally and externally who have been in touch 
with these stakeholders. You may also want to have some initial conversation with 
stakeholders, but be careful not to create any false expectations at this Stage .
Summarise your understanding by ﬁlling in parts of the summary Template 8 
(next page) for each stakeholder representative that you are already engaging 
with, or for those that you are considering seriously.
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 67
Analyse and Plan
Based on the completed templates consider the advantages and disadvantages 
of each of the assessed stakeholder representative and create a prioritised list of 
representatives that you would like to engage with on speciﬁc issues. You may 
decide that you would like to engage with several representatives on a speciﬁc issue. 
This is very recommendable if there is no single legitimate representative for the 
stakeholder group (a common occurrence!), engaging with several representatives 
will then provide more ‘balance’ and contribute to the completeness of your 
response.
THINGS TO CONSIDER
This Template draws its contents from this step, the previously described step 
where you assessed your current engagements, and on further knowledge that 
you gain throughout the engagement process. Therefore, it is important that you 
do not need to ﬁll in the whole T emplate right from the start. The T emplate 
should be considered as a ‘living’ document’ , used for capturing your growing 
and changing experience with and knowledge of stakeholders throughout the 
engagement history. You may only know enough to ﬁll in some cells once you have 
gone through a full engagement cycle with a stakeholder.   
Continuously double check your answers with others – people within and outside 
of the organisation that have experience with these representatives. Some of the 
aspects you can also check directly with the stakeholders. 
Be aware that the Template suggested here is only one possible way of compiling 
this information. You may want to simplify it or add some rows. An alternative 
approach you could adopt is to use the table on  p26, with a third column, as a 
means of compiling information about your stakeholders.P8: UNDERSTANDING AND LEARNING ABOUT STAKEHOLDERS AND THEIR REPRESENTATIVES
STAGE 2
 Leading Opinion        Good Knowledge                       
 Medium Knowledge  Lacking Knowledge   No Knowledge
Give details:_____________________________________
 Willing        Moderately interested but friendly          Uninterested    HostileSUMMARY  TEMPLATE  T8: STAKEHOLDER PROFILE*
Primary subject / issue of 
engagement with this group
Stakeholder ObjectiveStakeholder group:Stakeholder Proﬁ  le Last Updated:
Preferred level of engagement 
with this group
Stakeholder group representative
Speciﬁ  c representative / 
representing organisation
Internal contact person 
Stakeholder’s general view 
on the issue
Expectations towards the 
business regarding the issue
Engagement history & current 
highest level of and approaches 
to engagement  
Stakeholders’ usual or preferred 
highest level of and approaches 
to engagement
Stakeholder’s sources of funding[ﬁ  ll in if you are already engaging]
Relationships/conﬂ  icts with 
other stakeholders
Knowledge of the issue
Legitimacy or perceived 
legitimacy High Legitimacy       Limited Legitimacy            Low Legitimacy    No Legitimacy
Give details:_____________________________________
 Conﬂ  ict between perceived and actual legitimacy
Give details:________________________________
Willingness to engage
Actual and/or potential impacts 
of stakeholder on business –  
associated risks and opportunitiesPositive impacts / Opportunities:
Negative impacts / Risks:
Scale at which they operate  Global                Regional  National              Subnational  Local
Give details:___________________________________
Cultural issues to consider
Practical issues to consider 
(e.g the stakeholder’s ability 
to engage given resources, 
staff, etc.) (see also Stage 3)
Is it necessary to engage with 
this stakeholder?
Other Comments
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 69 *electronic version downloadable at www.accountability.org.uk
Analyse and Plan
Demand for reduction  
of hazardous  
substances in products
Demand for decrease in
complexi tyWaste reduction
Rising attention for  
human rights
Demand for security
Increase of on - and 
off-line electronic 
communication, both in 
advanced and emerging 
markets
Increase of 
accountability
Spread of AIDS/HIVPhilips’ Analysis of and Response to Trends and Issues
The Dutch electronics company Philips takes another approach to considering their responses to speciﬁc issues than the one that is 
outlined above. The two can however be considered as complementary.
Philips identiﬁes 5 subject areas of signiﬁcant strategic relevance: demographics, society, consumer behaviour, technology and 
business. The main trends in these are assessed and the related issues speciﬁed. This is done under consideration of information from 
sources such as the World Bank, World Business Council for Sustainable Development, the World Summit in Johannesburg and the 
World Economic Forum, and combined with Philips’ own research and considerations. Based on this, one or more strategic responses 
are allocated to each issue.
The chart below illustrates the resulting overview for two of the subject areas:
SubjectDemographicsGrowing population 
with an increasing 
demand for improved 
quality of lifeSociety• Focus on healthcare products
• Social investment program focused on health
• EcoVision program
• EcoDesign of products with weight, energy reduction  
 and recyclability as focal areas
• Social investment program focused on education
• Pilots in new and emerging markets with sustainability  
 as business driverPhilips Strategic Response Trends Issues
• Health and communicable 
 diseases
• Climate change  
 (global warming)
• Limited resources  
 (energy, materials)
• Education
• Eradication of poverty
Aging population with 
an increasing demand 
for improved quality 
of life• Focus on early   
 identiﬁcation of diseases  
 and treatment
• Expanding costs for 
 healthcare• Preventive healthcare products
• Personal healthcare products
Retreating governments
Emerging role of 
industries and NGOs 
(non-governmental 
organisations)• Limited supranational 
 regulations• Stakeholder dialogue
• NGOs and governments as business partners
• Active role in WBCSD, GRI, UNEP, etc.
• Lead-free soldering
• Mercury reduction  • Lead- free soldering program
• EcoDesign with hazardous substances as focal area
• Complicated use of  
 electronic products• Focus on simplicity of products underlined by Sense
 an d Simplici ty brand promise
• Dealing with privacy • RFID business development
• Privacy policy
• Lighting as security application
• Changing business models • Joint ventures and partnerships
• NGOs,  academi a and governments  as business  partners
• Connected Planet approach
• Product safety
• Employee health and  
 safety• Global product safety policy
• Global health and safety reporting system
• Increasing uncertainty
• Strong impact on quality  
 of life in developing  
 countries• General Business Principles
• Policy development for employees
• Social investment program in communities  
 focused on health and education• Take-back of electronic
 pro ducts• Active role and participation in recycling programs
• De mand for transparency • General Business Principles
• Supplier Sustaina bility ProgramP8: UNDERSTANDING AND LEARNING ABOUT STAKEHOLDERS AND THEIR REPRESENTATIVES
BACKGROUND
Successful engagement may require signiﬁcant resources. Resources are 
required for the engagement process itself, but more signiﬁcantly in making 
any necessary changes in response to the outcomes of stakeholder engagement. 
The availability of resources, degree of organisational commitment and the 
operational and strategic necessities of the business inﬂuence the business’ 
“margins of movement”  regarding the issue. Engagement outcomes may have 
signiﬁcant consequences for your business’ operations and strategy. Therefore, it 
is important to consider these possible outcomes regarding speciﬁc issues before, 
and to relate these to the margin of movement that you have regarding an issue. 
You need to consider the possible costs of the process and the degree to which its 
outcomes and follow-up activities would conﬂict or require alignment with other 
company objectives. If there is a discrepancy between what you think may be 
the outcomes of the engagement and your company’s, check your organisation’s 
willingness to adapt the objectives and strategy to respond to the stakeholder’s 
expectation. Be aware that you can only engage on a meaningful strategic 
level if your company is willing and able to reconsider its objectives and 
strategies. This should be understood as a potential opportunity, because an 
alignment of objectives and strategy with material stakeholder expectations 
is one of the key beneﬁts of good stakeholder engagement!STAGE 2
Local Adaptability in Risk Assesments at Telefónica
The results of Telefónica’s CSR department’s risk assessments are compiled in individual reports for every country. They then form a 
basis for discussion and joint development of a strategy.   An important ﬁrst step in this is to ensure that the CSR department’s view of 
the challenges and priorities corresponds to the reality as experienced in the local context.
Deﬁning the margins of movement - knowing which expectations you can  
and want to meet and which expectations you can’t meet - is a key step on your 
way towards developing a plan of action, and for identifying suitable stakeholder 
representatives to engage with. Being clear about your margins of movement 
is also important so that you and your stakeholders can be clear about the 
possibilities and limitations of a stakeholder engagement process. 
The following factors need to be considered when considering your resources  
for implementing outcomes and deﬁning your margins of movement: 
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 71P9: CHECKING FOR RESOURCE COMMITMENTS AND DEFINING “MARGINS OF MOVEMENT”
Analyse and Plan
BACKGROUND
Factors to consider for the engagement itself:
• Conﬂicting interests and dilemmas (internal and external), which might   
 prevent or derail successful engagement.
• Possibility of using/building on existing engagement processes and structures  
 both internally and externally (e.g. customer panels, investor relations   
 meetings, industry bodies, multi-stakeholder initiatives).
• The geographical scale of the engagement. Is engagement on a local, regional  
 or global (or all) scales required?
For the response and outcomes:
• Internal resources (systems, people, budgets, etc.) necessary to put insights  
 and possible commitments into practice.
• Conﬂicting interests and dilemmas (internal and external), which might   
 prevent or derail possible actions (e.g. strict and low pricing targets for
 procurement vs. objectives for improved labour standards in the supply chain).
• Margins of movement in relation to a speciﬁc issue. This means, what can and  
 what cannot be done regarding an issue. Which stakeholder expectations can  
 be met under which circumstances? Which cannot be met?SIG’s Consideration of its Positioning in relation to stakeholder expectations
Following a range of surveys, consultations and workshops evaluating the concerns and expectations of stakeholders, the Swiss 
utilities company SIG undertook internal dialogues in order to deﬁne it’s position on the identiﬁed issues and expectations.
Amongst various functions, the internal dialogue also involved the executive management team. The dialogue focused on identifying 
ways of ensuring that material stakeholder expectations are met. This involved a consideration of the company’s limitations, in order 
to ensure that SIG does not commit to actions that would exceed them. Simultaneously, potential strategic opportunities that were 
indicated by the stakeholder consultations were considered.
Use stakeholder engagement when:
• There is a major issue confronting the company.
• There is sufﬁcient overlap between the objectives and concerns  
 of the company and those of the stakeholder.
• There  is concern about the  impact of  a company goal or strategy.
• It is necessary to improve the company’s knowledge of an  issue.
• There is an opportunity to help shape company goals and   
 strategies.
• The company has sufﬁcient control or  inﬂuence  over a decision.
• The  company  needs  to create  more options  for a planned action.
• All the decisions related to an issue have not yet been made. Don’t use stakeholder engagement when:
• There is low or no company commitment to address an issue.
• The company has already made key decisions on the issue.
• There is insufﬁcient time to engage stakeholders.
• Addressing the issue is a relatively  short-term business objective.
• The company’s primary concern is risk mitigation.
• The company  is seeking  buy-in  through  advocacy  and persuasion.These are the guidelines that US consumer brand holding company Altria uses to help decide 
whether stakeholder engagement is appropriate.P9: CHECKING FOR RESOURCE COMMITMENTS AND DEFINING “MARGINS OF MOVEMENT”
STAGE 2
SUGGESTED METHODOLOGY M9:  
ASSESSING MARGINS OF MOVEMENT
The purpose of this activity is to ensure that the organisation has the ability and 
willingness to respond adequately to the outcomes of stakeholder engagement, and to 
be clear about its margins of movement.
Conduct a workshop or individual conversations with senior management 
and budget holders, and representatives from headquarters and the relevant 
ﬁeld level. Make sure you include all the internal players that have the ability to 
signiﬁcantly inﬂuence the process and the implementation of outcomes. 
Discuss the possible outcomes  of engaging with stakeholders, as well as the 
possible consequences of not engaging with them (use stakeholder representative 
assessment table as a basis). Consider worst- and best-case scenarios, and capture 
possible outcomes.
Learn about the resources  that would be available for engaging with the 
stakeholders, and discuss your own preliminary assessments of required resources 
with budget holders and decision makers. 
Discuss the business objectives and plans regarding the issues that you 
are considering engagement on.  Come to an agreement with all relevant 
individuals or departments regarding your business’ possible ‘margins of 
movement’ on the issue. 
Use the following  table as a guide to considering these questions and for 
summarising your results.
THINGS TO CONSIDER
If there seems to be contradictions between what individuals say, try and bring 
them together to consider these contradictions further.
The resources required to act on engagement outcomes is likely to far outweigh 
the immediate costs of engagement itself. Therefore it is important to not just 
focus on the resources required for the engagement itself.
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 73
Analyse and Plan
Stakeholder group to 
engage with
Issue to engage onAvailability of resources & margins of movement assessment
Stakeholder expectation
(Template 6)
Business' Margins of Movement
What are we seeking to achieve?
What is subject to discussion
with stakeholder?
Possible Outcomes of 
Engagement
Possible Outcomes of 
Not-engag ingBest Case:Possible Outcomes of Engagement
Actions/abilities & resources 
required in response to the 
outcomeBest Case:Worst  Case:
Worst Case:
Company’s ability  & resource availability for the implementation of potential outcomes 
(based on a preliminary assessment, reconsider once you have decided on an engagement 
process, and on further development of your abilities (Stage 3, T 11)
Current abilities and available
resources
Deﬁ  ne lacking abilities and 
unavailable resources
Currently lacking abilities, and 
unavailable resources, but 
commitment to development
Other commentsSUMMARY  TEMPLATE  T9*
Actions/abilities & resources 
required in response to the 
outcomeWhat is not subject to discussion
with stakeholder?P9: CHECKING FOR RESOURCE COMMITMENTS AND DEFINING “MARGINS OF MOVEMENT”
*electronic version downloadable at www.accountability.org.uk
STAGE 2
BACKGROUND
The information you have collected in previous stages, as well as the preliminary 
decisions and prioritisations you have made now provide the basis for developing 
a plan of objectives for further developments.
This plan will provide you with an overview of the diﬀerent stakeholders that 
you are considering to engage on an issue, and will help you to decide on speciﬁc 
approaches in Stage 4. 
SUGGESTED METHODOLOGY M10:  
CREATING AN ISSUE FOCUSED PLAN
This step is primarily a summary of selected outputs from previous steps which will 
be particularly useful during the subsequent process of capacity building, and when 
deciding on a speciﬁc method of engagement. The T emplate summarises: 
• Fill in one of the summary templates for each of the issues that you consider  
 engaging on.
• Consider previously researched examples, the best-practice standards and  
 the maturity of an issue when reviewing the strategic engagement objectives  
 for engagement on an issue that you set in Stage 1. If you change the strategic  
 engagement matrix, remember to also change it in the Template 3, the   
 ‘objective, issue and stakeholder matrix’.
• Enter the diﬀerent stakeholder groups that you want to engage with on an  
 issue and allocate the diﬀerent stakeholder representatives. Refer to the 
 summary table of diﬀerent levels of engagement (p 60), when capturing   
 the current level of engagement, as well as the target level for engagement.  
 Add additional rows if necessary.
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 75P10: CREATING AN ISSUE FOCUSED PLAN FOR STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
Analyse and Plan
SUMMARY TEMPLATE T10: 
OVERVIEW OF STAKEHOLDER REPRESENTATIVES AND  
STAKEHOLDER-SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES*
Strategic objective (s) for
engagement on the issueIssue of Engagement
Stakeholder groups to engage
with on the issue (Template 4):Description of Stage of Maturity
Stakeholder 
representativesCurrent Level 
of engagement 
(if applicable)Business' preferred
level(s) of 
engagementStakeholder-
speciﬁ  c
objective
Possible learning and examples from others (eg. standards, best-practise, benchmarks, etc.):P10: CREATING AN ISSUE FOCUSED PLAN FOR STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
*electronic version downloadable at www.accountability.org.uk
STAGE 2
By the end of this Stage you will have developed a better understanding of the 
gaps between your organisation and its stakeholders’ expectations. You will have 
learnt about your peers’ and competitors activities in relation to the priority 
issues and stakeholders, and you will have identiﬁed possible stakeholder 
representatives to engage with. You will also have gained an understanding of 
the resources that are available for the implementation of possible outcomes, as 
well as of the related Margins of Movement.
Outputs
       Stakeholder Assessments for each Prioritised Stakeholder Group
 Assessment of your Resources for the Implementation of Possible Outcomes
 Understanding of your Margins of Movement
 Assessment of the Business’ Ability to Respond to an Issue
 Overview of Stakeholder Representatives and Stakeholder Speci ﬁc   
  ObjectivesSTAGE 2 REVIEW
 THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 77
STAGE 3
The activities outlined in this chapter should be understood as an ongoing 
eﬀort to build and maintain the company’s and its stakeholders’ abilities to 
engage. These abilities concern not just the skills needed to facilitate dialogue 
and other engagement processes, but also for all the activities that lead up to and 
follow engagement, as described in stages one, two and ﬁve. Therefore activities 
such as recruitment, training, performance appraisals and the development 
of governance structures, policies and management systems should all reﬂect 
the requirements of the ‘engaging company’. This Stage provides some basic 
guidance on how this can be done.
The abilities of stakeholders to engage also require attention and may need 
strengthening. Companies who wish to engage with stakeholders need to 
consider the speciﬁc requirements and limitations of stakeholders, and may have 
to provide assistance to under-resourced stakeholders so that these can take part 
in engagements.PURPOSE
The aim of this Stage is to ensure that the company and its stakeholders have 
the organisational systems and skills to engage successfully in a productive 
relationship. It also looks at overcoming the barriers that may hinder stakeholders 
from engaging.Strengthen Capacities for Engagement
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 79
Strengthen Capacities for Engagement
PRINCIPLES
The principles of materiality, completeness and responsiveness provide guidance 
in ensuring that stakeholder engagement supports the goal of organisational 
accountability. This Stage aims to strengthen the company’s ability to deliver on 
all three principles.  
  
 
PROCESSThe Accountability Commitment 'Inclusivity'
Principles"Considering  the stakeholders'  interests  in organisational  decision  making'"
Ensuring that your company and it's employees are able to understand its stakeholders 
concerns and expectations, and preparing your company for being able to respond to these 
expectations and concerns adequately.Responsiveness Completeness Materiality
Stage 2
Stage 3: Strengthen Capacities for Eng agement
Strengthen the 
organisational 
ability to respondConsider the 
resource  
limitations and 
requirements 
of speciﬁc 
stakeholdersStrengthen the 
skills of required 
individuals
The company, the stakeholders, 
and the involved individuals are 
ready to engage
STAGE 3
BACKGROUND
The organisational ability to respond to issues has already been analysed in 
Stage two, the following focuses on what can be done in order to improve this 
‘response-ability’.
Samarco
Brazilian company Samarco has strengthened its ability to engage with employees at all levels, in order to improve both its quality and 
environmental management systems and its capacity to innovate.  This producer of iron ore pellets is owned jointly by Companhia Vale 
do Rio Doce and BHP Billiton. Facing pressure from shareholders abroad, the company started phasing in ISO 14000 and ISO 9000 
with certiﬁcation in the mid-1990s. Its “Quality House” model with clear targets provides for regular engagement of employees at all  
levels and encourages the creative use of in-house knowledge. The result has been an environmental policy and management system that 
is not the sole responsibility of the environmental protection division, but of all employees. Employees from all divisions volunteer to  
assist in environmental monitoring and reporting. The start of a “Field of Ideas” programme at the initiative of the company president 
has also encouraged employees to provide innovative ideas on how to improve company performance in different areas.
Norsk Hydro and Amnesty International
The Norwegian oil and aluminium company Norsk Hydro and Amnesty International (AI) have established a long-standing successful 
partnership, in which Amnesty International advises Norsk Hydro to develop systems and principles for tackling issues related to  
corruption and human rights abuses. For example, when Norsk Hydro started considering setting up operations in China, Transparency 
International briefed the involved managers on human rights issues. While Norsk Hydro does provide ﬁnancial support to TI, TI still 
maintains the right to criticise Norsk Hydro’s behaviour. Despite occasional disagreements on some issues, both parties agree that there 
is a lot to learn from each other. The key enablers to respond to speciﬁc issues, as already initially assessed and 
described in Stage 2 ( p55), are:
• Governance and management commitment 
• Policy regarding the issue
• Performance indicators/measurements regarding the issue
• Clear assignment of internal responsibility to competent individuals
• Review and learning processes that ensure that the management of the issue is  
 constantly adapted to changing circumstances and improved
The development of these enablers is part of ongoing improvement processes. 
Each organisation needs to ﬁnd its own approach that ﬁts into already existing 
management systems. Frequently, the integration of stakeholder engagement 
into these management processes itself plays an important role. 
The following table suggest some of the actions that could be taken in order to 
improve an organisation’s ability to engage with and respond to stakeholders:
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 81P11: STRENGTHENING YOUR COMPANY’S ABILITY TO RESPOND
Strengthen Capacities for Engagement
P11: STRENGTHENING YOUR COMPANY’S ABILITY TO RESPOND
• Senior level champions for speciﬁc issues can drive high level responsiveness.   
 Internal allies can be very helpful in taking speciﬁc issues to top-level management,  
 can be found across the company, for example risk managers, investor relations, the  
 marketing department or quality management.
• Executive remuneration can be linked with issue-speciﬁc metrics.
• Key budget holders need to be involved in a conversation about necessary budgets  
 and the availability of ﬁnancial resources. Their understanding of these issues is   
 crucial to their buy-in, and for securing the necessary resources.
• Board and management shall also be encouraged to take a leadership role   
 in championing the issue. They need to be involved in order to understand their   
 responsibility for leading the process and driving the associated vision, mission,   
 strategic considerations and developing a responsive internal culture and values. Strengthening Enablers fo r Success ful Response
Enabler Ways of Strengthening the Enabler
Board and management  
commitment to issue
Top management fully aware of the 
issue, the required resources, and 
understand linkages with business 
strategy and objectives, as well as the 
opportunities and the risks associated 
with engagement. 
• Not all internal groups will be involved in the development of a ﬁrst policy draft, but
 should be involved in shaping the ﬁnal policy through, for example, stakeholder   
 advisory panels or consultations .
• Corporate responsibility standards, like the ones mentioned in the table on p 57.
 (where to look for further learning) or those developed by  other companies can   
 provide a model for policies, which draws on or has already been legitimised through  
 stakeholder involvement.Agreed policies or procedures  
regarding the issue 
Policies developed through dialogues 
involving those responsible for 
implementation, those inﬂuenced 
by them, and those responsible for 
allocating the required resources for their 
implementation. 
• The  timing of stakeholder interactions should allow them to feed into internal   
 reporting, budgeting and management cycles.
•  Governance and management processes should include speciﬁc quality control   
 mechanisms to control the quality of the organisational response.Current engagement activities  
regarding the issue
Engagement activities aligned with the 
governance and management processes 
that direct the business.
• Initial internal discussion about indicators and targets especially considered within  
 the context of other business objectives and measurement systems can form a basis  
 for discussion with other internal and external stakeholders. Performance indicators  and targets 
regarding the issue
Performance indicators, measurements 
and targets informed by stakeholder 
dialogue. 
• Integration of relevant skills into recruitment policies, job-requirements and   
 performance-appraisals is essential. This should include both individuals with   
 signiﬁcant contact with external stakeholders as well as for managers with signiﬁcant  
 inﬂuence over internal stakeholders.Internal responsibility and competency 
to address the issue
Staff involved have the required 
skills, personal characteristics 
and competencies to engage with 
stakeholders and address this issue. 
• A holistic approach to reviewing the whole engagement process is set out in Stage 5,
 but on a smaller scale learning circles, discussion forums as well as learning   
 networks within or between different companies or stakeholders are a useful   
 mechanism.Review and learning processes in regards 
to the issue
Processes in place to ensure review 
and learning to innovate and adapt 
organisational policy and processes.
STAGE 3
Novozymes’ Social Responsibility Policy
“The Danish biotech company Novozymes will work to continuously improve our social performance. We will set ambitious objectives 
and integrate social and human rights considerations into our daily business. We will identify and focus our efforts on issues most 
relevant to us at an individual, national, regional and global level in order to make a positive difference.
• We are all responsible for identifying and assessing areas and issues where our social performance can be improved -  
 and act upon it.
• In our daily work we must all be aware of our social responsibilities, follow best practices and respect each other.
• We must always listen to the social responsibility concerns of our stakeholders and respond openly. We will have close  
 relations to the communities where we operate and act as a good corporate citizen.
• We will constantly challenge ourselves to improve our social performance and meet the local and global objectives.
• We must ensure that we all have equal opportunities to grow and fully unlock our potential in a non-discriminatory  
 environment.
• We will respect basic human rights and labour standards by monitoring our own performance and collaborate with our 
 suppliers and subcontractors to promote a socially responsible behaviour.
• We will do our utmost to ensure that our business practices are open and honest.
• We will seek partners with core values matching ours.
• When we develop new products we will consider the social impact.
• Product safety is a major priority - from development to customer application. We will not sell products that to our  
 knowledge will be used in a way that violate safety and regulatory requirements.
• We will report openly and honestly on our social performance on a regular basis.”
The US gold mining company has a ‘5 Star’ rating system for assessing community and external relations, from the top management 
down to site level. The 31 management system elements and aspects assessed with this rating system include: 
• Leadership & Commitment;
• Objectives, targets, KPIs and Improvement Programmes;
• Internal Communication and Consultation;
• Stakeholder Engagement & Communication;
• Risk management;
• Training, competency & awareness; 
• Performance monitoring, measurement & reporting; and
• Human Rights awareness
Each of the elements is illustrated with a deﬁnition of ﬁve different levels of achievement – detailing what is required from management 
and staff in order to perform well regarding  the element/aspect. This serves to provide effective guidance, and – in combination with 
internal and external assurance procedures – also enables continuous performance monitoring and improvement. 
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 83Newmont Mining Corporation’s 5 Star Rating System to Assess Community and External Relations
Strengthen Capacities for Engagement
SUGGESTED METHODOLOGY M11:  
FOR STRENGTHENING STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT CAPACITY
The purpose of this activity is to initiate an ongoing process of strengthening your 
company’s ability to address its speciﬁc priority issues more eﬀectively, especially 
in its engagement activities, but also to strengthen the management of corporate 
responsibility issues more generally. 
• Use the assessment that you have undertaken in Stage 2, and captured in   
 Template 4, as a starting point for identifying the areas where your policies,  
 management systems and governance structures should be improved.   
 Also, consider which potential outcomes you need to prepare for, as captured  
 in Template 11. 
• Consider also what you have learned about the way other people manage these 
 issues in the table on p57 (Where to look for learning from others), Stage  2. 
 For example, you may want to use corporate responsibility standards listed  
 there when developing policies on speciﬁc issues, or simply look at how other  
 businesses have developed their systems to work with a range of issues. 
• Consider the advice given in the “Strengthening enablers for success” table,  
 and agree on ways to strengthen your ability to respond to speciﬁc issues and  
 to engage on them. Capture your plans in summary Template 10, below. 
• Determine priorities for improvements.
• Identify learning resources. 
THINGS TO CONSIDER
• Be aware that engagement itself is a key step in strengthening some of the
 enablers. For example, if you want to develop a policy, you may want to
 use one of the engagement methods in Stage 4 to do this, e.g. establish a board
 sub-committee that investigates and reports to the board on priority issues to
 strengthen top-level commitment. P11: STRENGTHENING YOUR COMPANY’S ABILITY TO RESPOND
STAGE 3
SUMMARY TEMPLATE T11:  SYSTEMS STRENGTHENING PLAN*
Enabler Steps to strengthen th e enabler Priority Timeframe Resources  
(e.g. toolkits, 
standards, best-
practise examples, 
stakeholders
Board and management 
commitment
Agreed policies or procedures
Current Engagement 
Activities
Performance indicators/
measurements and targets 
regarding the issue
Internal responsibility for 
an issue
Review and learning 
processes in regards to 
the issue
  THE PRACTITIONER'S HANDBOOK ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT  | 85*electronic version downloadable at www.accountability.org.uk
Telefónica’s Internal Training
Telefónica’s CSR and Human Resources department are working together to integrate CSR 
and stakeholder issues into internal training courses for employees from various departments 
and business functions. A focus lies on creating an awareness of the link between brand, 
reputation and social responsibility. This part of the training is tied to an introduction to 
Telefónica’s values, policies and vision. Apart from the direct beneﬁts of increased awareness 
among employees, it also promotes an understanding of Telefónica’s CSR strategy and posi -
tioning as a source of help for identifying risks, solving problems and generating opportuni -
ties across the company.BACKGROUND
When deciding to engage with stakeholders, it is vital that you consider what 
internal skills are required. Many path-breaking engagement processes involve or 
are driven by what Sean Ansett calls ‘boundary spanners’. These are individuals 
within organisations that establish links across organisational boundaries, 
identify threats and opportunities, embed insights back into the organisation and 
make complex multi-stakeholder collaboration possible 9. However, engagement 
processes are likely to involve a broad variety of people with diﬀerent levels of 
expertise and experience in the area. This means eﬀorts to develop stakeholder 
engagement related skills should not only focus on sustainability and CSR 
managers or stakeholder engagement specialists, but also on general managers 
across functions. 
There is no generic stakeholder engagement skill-set, as diﬀerent expertise and 
experience may be needed to engage with public policy makers, supply chain 
workers, or to moderate an internet discussion with consumer activists for 
example. However, a basic range of skills and characteristics can be identiﬁed.  
Sometimes it may be practical to develop these skills with people who are dealing 
directly with stakeholders, but are not ‘engagement specialists’. In other cases, it 
may be more suitable to draw on the expertise of practitioners from established 
professions such as labour relations, lobbying, public aﬀairs, and market 
research  10 . Apart from skills, another key contributor to successful engagement 
is credibility. For example, facilitators who are from a similar background to 
the stakeholder group may be better able to understand cultural issues and put 
stakeholders at ease. 
In addition to the ability to engage successfully, being knowledgeable on relevant 
issues and being credible, beneﬁcial skills include project management and 
analytical skills, as well as certain personality traits. The engagement skills and 
characteristics map on the following page illustrates this required combination 
of skills and characteristics. The requirements associated with each of these skills 
and characteristics are described in further detail below, along with possible 
sources for improvement.
9 For more on boundary spanners, please also see: Sean Ansett 's article in the AccountAbility  
Forum No.6 Stakeholder Engagement, London, 2005.
10 See also the Placer Dome case study in Volume 1: :The Gui de to Practitioners' Perspectives o n 
Stakeholder Engagement ", p29, box 2.4.Strengthen Capacities for Engagement
P12: DEVELOPING THE INTERNAL SKILLS AND CHARACTERISTICS NEEDED FOR ST AKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
STAGE 3
Description of Beneﬁcial Skills and 
CharacteristicsAreaStakeholder Engagement Skills and Characteristics
Possible ways of Development 
and Improvement
• Guidelines for and training in project  
 management are available from the  
 Project Management Institute at 
 www.pmi.org.
• Personal abilities must be
 complemented and guided by enabling  
 policies and procedures, as described  
 in the previous section.• Engaging with stakeholders in an  
 effective manner, a timely fashion and  
 within budget. 
• The ability to examine and interpret  
 the outcomes of stakeholder   
 engagement in a way that captures the  
 key facts and ﬁgures, as well as  
 messages and insights. Project Management
& Analyisis
Personal Behaviour • Displaying individual personality traits 
 such as integrity, ability to focus on   
 solutions,  motivation, and creativity, etc.
• Different engagements may make some of  
 these behaviours more or less important.   
 For instance, unlike conﬂict resolution   
 processes over labour disputes, consumer  
 focus groups on purchasing preferences 
 do not require a ‘solutions oriented   
 outlook’.• Develop ethical guidelines and policies  
 for 