URL: https://nationalcareers.service.gov.uk/careers-advice/how-to-prepare-for-psychometric-tests/

Psychometric tests: prepare and practise | National Careers Service
Skip to main content
Tell us whether you accept cookies
We use
cookies to collect information
about how you use the National Careers Service. This information is used to make the website work as well as possible and improve our services.
Set cookie preferences
You’ve accepted all cookies. You can
change your cookie settings
at any
            time.
Hide
National Careers Service
Menu
Explore careers
Skills assessment
Find a course
Careers advice
Contact us
beta
How could we improve this service? Your
feedback
will help.
Home
Careers advice
Psychometric tests: prepare and practise
There is a problem
Psychometric tests: prepare and practise
Many employers use psychometric tests as part of the recruitment  process. They're common in graduate jobs, work placements and internships.
Types of psychometric tests
You may take tests early on, as part of the initial online screening process, or as part of the interview stage. They help employers to:
identify the people best suited to a particular job
see if you are a good fit for their company culture
screen a lot of applicants without having to interview everyone
Some employers are developing tests that you do through online games or apps. Tests are standardised and often timed. To perform well you need both speed and accuracy.
Tests used in application screening generally measure:
ability – your knowledge and skills
aptitude – your natural ability to do something
personality – things like your typical ways of thinking, motivations, interests, values and beliefs
You’ll see tests of things like:
verbal reasoning – your ability to understand written information
numerical reasoning – how you think using numbers
abstract or spatial reasoning – your ability to understand patterns, logical rules or work with shapes
personality - questions about how you behave, to predict how you might act in a work situation (there are no right or wrong answers)
situational judgement tests - set a scene and ask what you would do in that situation
Psychometric testing for disabled people
If you have a disability that might affect your test performance, you can ask for reasonable adjustments. This makes sure that the testing process is fair. Adjustments can include things like:
being able to use screen reading software
having extra time to complete the test
Get in touch with the employer as soon as they ask you to take a test, to make sure these adjustments are made.
Prepare for a psychometric test
You do not have to revise before a psychometric test, though it helps to get some practice. This will give you a chance to:
get familiar with the types of questions employers may ask
overcome your nerves
work out how much time you’re likely to have on each question so you can pace yourself
learn tips to make sure you perform at your best
You can find free practice tests on sites like:
The Psychometric Test Project
The British Psychological Society
SHL practice tests
If you’re at university or a recent graduate, speak to your university careers service. They may be able to give you free access to test materials. They may also run workshops or mock assessment centres to help you prepare.
Check the website of the company you are applying to, as they may have practice tests.
You may be able to find more specific practice materials on careers sites aimed at sectors like:
law
medicine
finance
There are also lots of books available that offer tips and advice.
Learn from your mistakes
Go over your answers to find out where you are weakest. You can improve by doing more of the kinds of questions you find most difficult. If sites provide feedback on your performance this can help you to concentrate on areas to work on.
For numerical reasoning tests, it may help to work on your maths skills like:
fractions
percentages
ratios
Tips for taking psychometric tests
sit somewhere quiet with no distractions and try to stay calm
have a pen, paper and calculator to hand
do the tests on a laptop or PC and use headphones if you have them
make sure you have a reliable internet connection
log on with plenty of time ahead, close down all other windows and maximise the test window
check the timings – some tests will actually tell you how long you have for each question, for others you may have to work it out
read the instructions carefully and do the practice questions before you start
do not use the back button in your browser as it may end the test without saving your answers
if you can’t answer a question don’t stick on it and lose time– take a guess and move on
if you answer a question and have time before the next one appears, use the time to calm yourself with a couple of deep breaths
Related content
Graduate schemes: getting a place
Interview tips
How to find an internship
Speak to an adviser
You can call
0800 100 900
or
use webchat
to speak to an adviser.
We're open:
8am to 8pm
Monday to Friday
10am to 5pm
Saturdays and
bank holidays
We're closed on Sundays, Christmas Day and New Year's Day.
Website information
About us
Help
Privacy and cookies
Accessibility statement
Terms and conditions
Information sources
Other UK career services
Scotland
Wales
Northern Ireland
All content is available under the
Open Government Licence v3.0
, except where otherwise stated
© Crown copyright