URL: https://www.belbin.com/media/1388/belbin-uk-crisisteamexercise-robgroenplusbelbin-tj-dec2006.pdf

December  2006   TJ    45FEATURE
I have been using Belbin’s 
T eam Role Model in 
Holland for 25 years, apply -
ing it in a variety of ways 
and in many organisations. 
Over the years I have developed 
a number of teambuilding games 
and exercises, often in close 
cooperation with the participants 
themselves. The Crisis T eam 
Exercise is my unrivalled favour -
ite and has proven to be a real 
eye-opener; its effectiveness is 
obvious in the discussions it trig -
gers among the participants. 
The exercise is simple to run, 
fun and provides great insight into, 
and understanding of, the Belbin 
Team Roles. It doesn’t require any 
special facilities or materials – the 
participants need flipcharts and 
markers, and all you need is to do 
some clever thinking beforehand. 
It provides a sharp and evocative 
picture of how team roles actually 
manifest themselves, not just at 
the level of observable behaviour 
but even more at an underlying 
level, and how team members solve 
problems, create their own reality 
and give meaning to life itself. It is 
no surprise that complementarity 
is not as easy as it seems.
Timing
There are two guiding principles 
for the timing of this exercise: 
firstly, the participants should 
already possess a certain under -
standing of team roles, so the exer -
cise can be cunningly introduced as The Crisis Team
ExerciseRob Groen  demonstrates how to help 
team members appreciate the importance 
of diversity in a successful team
Team roles were first recognised during research at Henley Management College in the 1970s. 
Meredith Belbin set out to identify what made some teams succeed and others fail. He came to 
realise that there were eight (now known to be nine) forms of behaviour which are useful to teams, 
and that the best teams had all of the roles within them.
The nine forms of behaviour were:
• Plant (PL) – Creative, imaginative, unorthodox. Solves difficult problems. Sometimes preoccupied, 
poor at communication and uninterested in incidentals.
• Resource Investigator (RI) – Extrovert, enthusiastic, communicative. Explores opportunities. 
Develops contacts. Can be over-optimistic and lose interest quickly.
• Co-ordinator (CO) – Mature, confident, good chairperson. Clarifies goals, promotes decision-
making, delegates. May be manipulative and delegate too much.
• Shaper (SH) – Challenging, dynamic, thrives on pressure. Drive and courage to overcome 
obstacles. At times provokes people and offends.
• Monitor Evaluator (ME) – Sober, strategic, discerning. Sees all options. Judges accurately. Can 
lack drive and the ability to inspire.
• Teamworker (TW) – Co-operative, mild, perceptive, diplomatic. Listens, builds, averts friction. But 
indecisive in crunch situations.
• Implementer (IMP) – Disciplined, reliable, conservative, efficient. Turns ideas into practical 
actions. Somewhat inflexible and can be slow to respond to new possibilities.
• Completer Finisher (CF) – Painstaking, conscientious, anxious. Searches out errors and omissions. 
Delivers on time. But can be inclined to worry unduly, and has a reluctance to delegate.
• Specialist (SP) – Single-minded, self-starting, dedicated. Provides knowledge and skills in rare 
supply. But tends to contribute only on narrow front and dwell on technicalities.  
The perfect team doesn’t have to have nine people. Although some people will be very predominantly 
in one role, others might be able at several roles, for example a Plant/Shaper or Teamworker/  
Co-ordinator.a way to test their current knowledge. 
Secondly, it should be run before the 
participants have had their own team 
role reports fed back to them. This 
enables them to complete the exercise 
in an open-minded and spontaneous 
way, without being led by the expec -
tations laid down in their reports; 
conversely, this prevents them from attempting to disprove their report 
by acting in an opposite way.
The groups
The ideal size of the subgroups is 
between three and six people. The 
composition of these determines 
what will happen, so it needs to be 
well thought-out. Divide people 
FEATURE
46   TJ    December  2006
Soldiers 
bolster 
defences 
in York 
following 
widespread 
flooding 
in North 
Yorkshire 
in 2000 who are orderly and practical-
minded, IMPs in particular, from 
those who are more innovative and 
chaotic, such as RIs, as this creates 
the most promising contrast.
The next thing is to look for a 
group of real thinkers – MEs and/
or PLs; a group that is forceful 
and achievement-oriented – SHs 
and/or COs; and a group that is 
quite the opposite of the latter, 
such as TWs. These groups echo 
the ‘Teamopoly-teams’ that Belbin 
and his associates designed during 
their Henley experiments.
The instructions
The instructions should be as mini -
mal as possible. I usually say: ‘This 
assignment is meant to familiarise 
you with the team role types and to 
help you apply your knowledge to 
solving an interesting problem.’
The groups are sent away for an 
hour to create their crisis and devise 
their solutions to it. See figure 1 
(p48) as an example of the instruc -
tions that can be displayed on the 
flipchart. The crisis the team can 
generate has no limits: it may be 
big or small, as realistic or fantas -
tic as they please. The only rule is 
that, as a group, they have to reach 
agreement on every issue on the 
basis of a full and strong consensus. 
No-one may be ignored or ruled 
out – everyone has a right of veto.
What can you expect?
When the groups return to the 
plenary room and prepare them -
selves to tell their stories, it is as 
if a stage-curtain rises and a life 
theatre begins. It is a Commedia 
dell’Arte  of applied psychology, in 
which our dear stereotypes interact 
in endless variations and improvi -
sations. Here is what you might 
expect to happen (any resemblance 
to people you know is entirely 
deliberate and not exaggerated).
The crises that Implementers  
produce demonstrate their realistic 
views and practical mindsets. They 
all come down to technical failures: 
a power station has broken down, 
a train has been derailed, a dyke is breached. It is a fait accompli,  often 
situated within their own profes -
sional field. The dauntless crisis 
team immediately gets into action 
– repairing the damage, restoring 
order and regaining control over 
the situation as soon as possible. 
Preferably, they act according to a 
trusted method, following a tested 
scenario. In such circumstances they 
prefer a decisive leader, such as an 
SH, who knows what he wants, 
with an ME and an RI to assist 
him in an efficient and instrumental 
way, and relying heavily on a lot of 
IMPs and SPs to turn everything 
into action. There is hardly ever 
room for a PL (too vague and time-
consuming in their view) or a TW 
(why be sociable here?). Their pres -
entations are serious and business -
like, well schematised on a flipchart, 
and they seem convinced that their 
approach will work out.
Resource Investigators  never 
seem able to resist the temptation 
to add a big shot of fun to their 
crisis Their disasters are chaotic 
and uncontrollable, many things 
coinciding at the same time (a 
kidnap, mysterious infections, a 
tsunami and rebels proclaiming 
Holland a republic). The crisis is running and increasing at this 
very moment and completely 
open-ended – anything can hap -
pen. Many options are available, 
many solutions possible. Everyone 
is doing something in a carnival 
atmosphere and loosely coordinat -
ed way. A lot of attention is paid 
to keeping the public informed 
(or, even more fun, manipulated). 
They rely on the qualities of the 
SH, RI and PL and instantly rule 
out the CF as being a worrier and 
a dampener, depressing the opti -
mism of the crisis team by focus -
ing on details no one wants to hear 
about. Their presentation is often 
worth remembering for its playful 
and entertaining performance.
 Plants  like to go beyond real -
ity whenever they can. Their crises 
are unorthodox and take you by 
surprise: meteorites that split the 
earth, charming hills that suddenly 
turn into mysterious volcanoes, 
or viruses that wipe out all living 
people except those with the team 
role profile matching their own. 
Their crisis teams are just as unpre -
dictable as their crises, but contain 
people who are good at cracking 
problems and coming up with 
unusual solutions. When they like 
December  2006   TJ    47FEATURE
The Crisis Team Exercise has proven to be a real 
eye-opener; its effectiveness is obvious in the 
discussions it triggers among the participants.
Haitians 
gather on 
rooftops 
in the 
aftermath 
of Tropical 
Storm 
Jeanne in 
2004the assignment and their minds are 
on fire, their presentations are as 
brilliant as their outcomes, with a 
lot of last-minute changes, with the 
participants constantly interrupting 
and correcting one another. 
A major feature of the crises that 
Monitor Evaluators  present is that 
they haven’t happened yet. Sure, 
nasty things are on the horizon, but 
the real thing still has to take place. 
So the crisis is announced but still 
escapable. Abstract as it is, there is 
always some time and some room 
to prepare and overlook the conse -
quences before responding. Their 
crisis teams act sensibly, considering 
all the relevant information and 
choosing the best solution. This 
means that the thinking phase usu -
ally happens well in advance of the 
action phase. Their presentations 
are weighed and considered, based 
on sound arguments that seem 
irrefutable, although they are some -
times steeped in relativity, irony 
and even pedantry, describing the 
lengthy debates they had over ques -
tions such as what the best defini -
tion of a crisis would be.
The crises of Shapers  are over -
powering. Normally they’re huge 
and inescapable, creating a violent 
and acute threat, causing many 
casualties. Fires and explosions 
occur with amazing regularity 
– they like something that really 
hurts. But their response is just as 
vehement and aggressive: imme -
diate, forceful and highly focused 
action directed at the core of the 
problem. No mercy is shown.
Without any exception, they 
rely on a leader who is decisive, 
knows what he wants and has all 
the authority to act accordingly 
– an SH – of course s/he will be 
surrounded by a team of dedicated 
assistants, such as IMPs and RIs. 
The CO, PL, TW and often the 
CF are quickly set aside, since they 
only seem to slow down the SH’s 
pace for no obvious reason. The 
ME, for whom SHs usually have 
an uncomfortable respect, is per -
mitted to join in and analyse the 
situation, provided that he may be ignored by the SH if s/he chooses.
Their presentation is in line 
with their solution and is impres -
sive in one of two ways: when they 
succeed in joining their forces, they 
are full of energy to convince their 
audience that their crisis obviously 
is the worst of all, just as their 
solution is the best. But if they 
can’t get their minds together, their 
presentation is a striking example 
of the liveliness of their internal 
differences and disagreements.
The crises that Co-ordinators  
bring in initially never seemed to 
have unique features. Maybe that’s 
because they prefer to integrate 
the solutions that others produce 
rather than come up with solu -
tions of their own. Progress, not 
content, is what drives them. Their 
disasters often describe emergency 
situations in which ‘management’ 
or government has disappeared 
– like a car on the run, without a driver. The main aim of their crisis 
teams is to restore control, create 
some form of interim manage -
ment, make new rules and get the 
country or the company going 
again. Normally they provide jobs 
for every team role type, according 
to a well-organised sequence of 
events. Their presentation is calm, 
self-assured and optimistic.
The crises that Completer 
Finishers  devise are quite similar 
to those of the IMPs. They are just 
as realistic, but often smaller in 
scale and more complicated. Wary 
and threat-sensitive as CFs are, 
they spend a lot of energy deal -
ing with the delicacies and com -
plexities that emerge in the crisis. 
When a rare lion has escaped 
during an annual fair, the problem 
is not just to save the public, but 
also to spare the lion, have the 
fair continue undisturbed and 
avoid financial claims. Not only 
FEATURE
48   TJ    December  2006
Soldiers 
search for 
survivors 
during an 
earthquake 
drill in 
western 
Turkey in 
June 
Xxxxx xxxx 
xxx xxxx 
xxxx xxx 
xxx xxxxx
Figure 1Rob Groen  is a child psychologist, whose 
company, CMB, has been using the Belbin 
Model in its training solutions for 25 years. 
He can be contacted at cmb@wxs.nlthe crisis itself but also the after -
math is to be taken care of, such as 
the financial damage and the loss 
of reputation that springs from it. 
The CFs’ crises take a long time 
to recover from. Their approach is 
careful and considerate and speaks 
of thoughtful risk management.
Interestingly enough, they call 
on forceful personalities such as the 
SH and IMP and the analytical 
mind of the ME, but they prefer to 
exclude their own role, CF, in the 
crisis team. They believe that they 
panic easily and are more useful in 
the aftercare and follow-up than in 
the handling of the crisis itself.
The disasters that Teamworkers 
produce can adopt all forms, 
depending on the participants’ sec -
ondary roles, but their attention is 
hardly ever directed towards solving 
the difficulty itself. Instead they 
deal with the relational problems 
that stem from it: taking care of the 
victims, comforting the relatives, 
being near in moments of hope and 
despair, or by entering into difficult 
negotiations with kidnappers and 
hijackers. In order to do so, they set 
up sizeable teams, invoking any -
body’s help and using lots of TWs 
to carry out the tasks. SHs and PLs 
are often avoided, as being too self-
centred and self-willed. TWs fear 
these roles can’t attune to the team 
and will disrupt the harmony. 
In line with their natural 
strengths, they like to do the 
presentation together, as a real 
team, dividing the subtasks fairly 
between them. Or they grant 
one of their junior members the 
opportunity of having the floor, 
and applaud and compliment them 
heartily when they do so.
In summary
Although the different solutions 
and presentations speak for them -
selves and hardly need any explana -
tion, it can be important to take 
some time to talk through them 
with the participants.
During the presentations, calling 
for spontaneous reactions from the 
other groups can provide valuable comments and some (non) verbal 
disapproval of the solutions on 
offer. These are wonderful examples 
of ‘team role arrogance’: the ten -
dency to believe that only their own 
self-evident attitude and approach 
will be effective in the end.
And, of course, they want to 
know what the facilitator thinks of 
their resolutions. Giving feedback 
requires some experience and sen -
sitivity in order to stay positive and 
clear, and make sure participants 
don’t feel trapped, embarrassed or 
put into boxes. Stress that each team role reflects and expresses a 
distinct problem-solving strategy, 
a built-in coping mechanism to 
deal with uncertainty and hard 
times, often with a lifetime history. 
Each role is a different way not 
just of solving problems, but also 
of defining them, that is reinforced 
and magnified when working in 
a group of related personalities. 
‘Team role resonance’ is what 
we call the compelling dynam -
ics of the group that exaggerates 
and intensifies the strengths and 
weaknesses of the dominant role, 
and which makes the group a far 
stronger caricature of a certain 
team role type than any one of the 
participants individually would be.
Identifying these different prob -
lem-solving styles, becoming aware 
that they exist and all have their rai-
son d’être , helps people see the value 
of others. Being able to relate them 
to differences in types of person can 
breed an understanding of the com -
plementary nature of the roles. The 
main objective is to create respect 
for these differences and maybe, 
even if it’s just for a brief moment, 
to enjoy these differences, instead of 
having them drive you to despair. The Crisis Team
1 Make up a crisis  
2 Compose a crisis team  
•  not on the basis of functional roles  
•  on the basis of the ‘pure’ team roles
a) What team role IN, why?
b) What team roles OUT, why?
c) What numbers?
d) What tasks?
3 Optional: names of well-known 
people that match the descriptions
•   full consensus, everyone has a veto
• prepare a presentation
