URL: https://s3-eu-west-1.amazonaws.com/mindfuleducation-cdn/vle-files/misc/management-l5-2019/lesson-assets/unit-509/U509-Line-Manager-Guide-on-Conflict_tcm18-89746.pdf

Guide  
January 2021Guidance for line 
managersA GUIDE TO
DEALING WITH 
CONFLICT AT 
WORK  
2The CIPD is the professional body for HR and people 
development. The registered charity champions better work 
and working lives and has been setting the benchmark for 
excellence in people and organisation development for 
more than 100 years. It has more than 150,000 members 
across the world, provides thought leadership through 
independent research on the world of work, and offers 
professional training and accreditation for those working in 
HR and learning and development.
A guide to dealing with conflict at work
1Introduction to the line manager 
support materials
Managers play a vital role in determining the health, wellbeing and engagement of their 
team. They also play an essential part in managing particular people management issues 
that arise in their team, such as bereavement, conflict, sickness absence and mental health 
problems, which can have a negative impact on employee health, wellbeing and engagement 
if not well managed. 
CIPD research  identified five key behavioural areas that are important for line managers to 
support the health, wellbeing and engagement of those who work for them:
 Being open, fair and consistent
 Handling conflict and p eople management issues
 Providing knowledge, clarity and guidance
 Building and sustaining relationships
 Supporting development 
A line manager’s behaviour and the culture they create in their team is the biggest influence 
on an employee’s work experience. Capability in these five behavioural areas, underpinned 
by an attitude of care, respect, compassion, wisdom and kindness, is vital for line managers 
to manage the health, wellbeing and engagement of their team. Such capability will also 
provide the foundation for line managers to manage particular people management issues 
and will enable managers to take a positive approach, recognise employee needs in these 
situations and manage them in ways that are sensitive, supportive and inclusive.
The CIPD has created a range of support materials  to help you adopt a management 
approach that supports good health, wellbeing and engagement in your team by helping 
you explore and develop your management capability. Designed for anyone who manages 
people, the guidance and exercises are quick and easy to use. They can help you save 
time and get better results by managing people well – all of which is good for your own 
wellbeing as well as that of your team.
To build on these resources, the CIPD has also created a series of guides focusing on specific 
areas of people management that aim to support managers in dealing with particular people 
management issues. Each of these guides provides practical information and advice relevant 
to that particular people management issue, as well as linking it to the approach covered 
in the support materials. The intention is that managers use the five key behavioural areas 
as the basis for managing all the issues, and draw on specific relevant behaviours from 
within the framework to help with the particular issue in question. Look out for the icons to 
understand which of the behaviours is particularly relevant to the issues being discussed. You 
can then refer back to the exercises  to develop these behaviours further.
A guide to dealing with conflict at work2Guidance for line managersIntroduction to this guide
Most of us spend a large portion of our waking hours at work, so the quality of our 
working environment and relationships has a significant impact on our wellbeing. In any 
workplace there will be many different experiences and perspectives: we each see the 
world in a different way. This means we react in our own way to situations at work, which 
will affect the relationships we have with those around us. This diversity of experience 
and thinking is a good thing, but it can sometimes lead to misunderstanding and conflict 
between people. Some conflict can be positive, such as a healthy amount of competition 
between team members to reach goals. But negative conflict, like bullying or personality 
clashes, can harm individuals and undermine teamworking.
As a manager, you need to be at the forefront when conflict occurs between team 
members. If you don’t tackle this conflict head on at an early stage, it’s likely to escalate. 
Our report, Managing Conflict in the Modern Workplace , also reveals that managers 
themselves can often be the cause of conflict. It is therefore essential you reflect on your 
own management style and the impact your behaviour has on others. The line manager 
support materials are designed to help you reflect on key aspects of your management 
approach and to take action to support your development. The key behavioural area that 
will assist you in managing this issue is:
 Handling conflict and people management issues
Exercise 3  offers ideas and inspiration relevant to this behavioural area.
The other behavioural areas will also be helpful when it comes to preventing, identifying 
and dealing with conflict in your team – as indicated throughout this guide. 
This guide will help you proactively identify and manage conflict at work. It covers the 
people management skills you need to become part of the solution to resolving workplace 
conflict – not the problem. It focuses on how to handle conflict at an early, informal stage – 
before issues escalate into serious disputes that require the use of formal procedures.
What does conflict look like?
Conflict between individuals at work can occur in many different ways. A work issue, like poor 
attendance or timekeeping, can cause conflict. Conflict can also stem from a disagreement 
between people. It can occur across a wide spectrum of behaviour, ranging from a personality 
clash to more serious types of unfair treatment – like bullying and harassment.
It can be obvious – like a heated argument – or less visible – like excluding someone from 
a work social event.
Obvious sources of conflict at work include:
• any form of bullying behaviour or harassment
• any form of discriminatory behaviour
• poor performance
• poor attendance and time-keeping
A guide to dealing with conflict at work3Guidance for line managers• unacceptable language
• excessive personal use of the internet or email
• theft
• drink or drug problems.
Other, less obvious sources include:
• differences in personality style or working
• taking credit for other people’s work or ideas
• not valuing other people’s views, background or experiences
• talking over people in meetings
• failing to include people in round-robin emails
• ignoring people or being discourteous
• poor personal hygiene.
Often, it’s these more subtle behaviours that, over time, if not tackled, lead to workplace disputes.
You may find it helpful to think through your capacity to build and sustain 
relationships  and create an environment that is open, respectful, kind, fair 
and consistent , to ensure you are in the best position to identify conflict in 
your team at the earliest possible stage. 
What is bullying and harassment?
Under the Equality Act 2010, harassment  is unlawful, and defined as ‘unwanted conduct 
related to a relevant protected characteristic, which has the purpose or effect of violating an 
individual’s dignity or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive 
environment for that individual’ .
The protected characteristics relevant to harassment are age, disability, gender 
reassignment, race, religion or belief, sex or sexual orientation. There are two types of 
harassment related to sex, both of which involve ‘unwanted conduct’ that has ‘ the purpose 
or effect of violating an individual’s dignity or creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, 
humiliating or offensive environment for that individual’.
Though there’s no legal definition of bullying , the Acas guide on bullying and harassment 
at work  states that it can include  ‘offensive, intimidating, malicious or insulting behaviour, 
an abuse or misuse of power through means that undermine, humiliate, denigrate or injure 
the recipient’.
Bullying or harassment may involve single or repeated incidents across a wide spectrum 
of behaviour. This can range from extreme forms of intimidation, like physical violence, to 
more subtle forms, like an inappropriate joke or ignoring someone.
Based on our research , the most common types of bullying or harassment experienced by 
employees are:
• being undermined or humiliated in one’s job
• persistent, unwanted criticism
A guide to dealing with conflict at work4Guidance for line managers• unreasonable pressure about job performance
• public humiliation
• shouting or very heated arguments
• verbal abuse
• isolation or exclusion from social activities.
You may find it helpful to think through your capacity to handle conflict 
and people management issues  and create an environment that is open,  
respectful, kind, fair and consistent , to ensure you are in the best position 
to identify conflict in your team at the earliest possible stage. 
The first defence: prevention is 
better than cure
Conflict is likely to fester and intensify if you ignore it. As a manager, you need the skills 
and confidence to intervene at an early stage to nip disagreements in the bud before 
they escalate. Handling conflict in a proactive and positive way will help you improve your 
team’s morale, retain valuable skills and talent, and reduce sickness absence. Reflecting on 
your management style and learning to handle conflict and people management issues will 
be key to this.
Here, we outline the practical steps you can take to prevent serious conflict from occurring 
in the first place:
1 Get to know your team better
By getting to know the people in your team as individuals and building and sustaining 
relationships with each team member, you’ll be better placed to:
• foster good working relationships with them
• anticipate any potential conflict within the team
• understand any personal pressures which might be affecting them at work
• talk frankly about any problems they might be experiencing with their colleagues (or the 
job itself).
  This relates closely to the behaviour area building and sustaining 
relationships . Look at Exercise 5 for advice on how to develop this area.
A guide to dealing with conflict at work5Things to consider
• Understand what really matters to your team and remember that everyone’s different. 
What are their personal triggers for stress? Do they feel secure and supported in their 
role? Do they have a sense of belonging and inclusion in their team?
• Give every team member a good induction when they start in a new role. This helps you 
get to know them, and helps them settle in.
• Get to know their preferred working styles. This encourages effective teamworking and 
reduces the risk of conflict.
• Make yourself personally available to talk. Show empathy and listen to their concerns. 
This encourages them to open up and approach you should they have a problem.
• Try not to shy away from personal issues. People aren’t always able to leave their 
domestic responsibilities and worries at home. If you know someone has suffered a 
bereavement or is going through a relationship breakdown, they may be understandably 
more emotional and have a lower tolerance level at work than they would do under 
normal circumstances.
Useful resources
Preventing stress: positive manager behaviour  
Supporting mental health at work  
How to help your team thrive at work  
2 Be aware of simmering tensions
People deal with relationships and conflict in different ways. Some show their annoyance 
swiftly and openly, while others who appear laidback and tolerant on the surface may find 
themselves becoming progressively annoyed with a colleague, manager or problem until 
they lose their temper, often over a minor issue proven to be the last straw. It is important 
to build and sustain relationships with your team and hone your capacity to handle conflict 
and people management issues so that you are aware of problems early and know what to 
do if simmering tensions start to appear.
  This relates closely to the behaviour area building and sustaining 
relationships.  Look at Exercise 5 for advice on how to develop this area.
Things to consider
• Monitor team relationships. Tension can arise in any team, so be alert to any signs that 
serious conflict is developing. Many disputes start as mild disagreements which appear 
to be resolved or forgotten straight away. However, just because a disagreement isn’t 
visible doesn’t mean it’s been resolved.
• Be confident to challenge any hint of inappropriate behaviour (for example, a sexist 
remark or personal insult) immediately. This will send a clear message to your team that 
unfair treatment, like bullying, is not tolerated.
• Have regular one-to-ones and try to create an environment in which people feel 
comfortable discussing their concerns about projects or issues in team meetings. 
Find ways to have informal conversations to pick up on any issues that are beginning 
to fester beneath the surface. You could, for example, use the feedback gained from 
employee feedback/voice mechanisms (for example, a survey which might demonstrate 
that employees feel frustrated by lack of progression) to highlight potential areas of 
frustration and kick off conversations.
Guidance for line managers
A guide to dealing with conflict at work6• Make sure you intervene and talk to the individuals concerned about what’s happening 
and what the real source of the disagreement is. Often there are other underlying issues 
at play (for example, an issue raised concerning someone’s performance could, in fact, 
highlight underlying feelings of resentment).
Useful resources
Information on culture and working environment  
Ethics at work  
3 Acknowledge when a team member is causing stress to others
It only takes one person to cause disharmony within a team as a result of their negative 
behaviour or poor performance.
Examples of behaviour and performance that can create stress at work:
• being overly critical
• having a short temper
• making personal remarks
• not sharing information
• talking about others behind their backs
• avoiding unpopular team tasks
• poor time-keeping or attendance.
  This relates closely to the behaviour area being open, respectful, fair and 
consistent. Look at Exercise 1 for advice on how to develop this area.
Things to consider
• Encourage people to talk to you if they have concerns about a work issue or are 
experiencing difficulties in their personal lives. By understanding an employee’s context 
and situation, you’ll be closer to understanding how it impacts their behaviour at work, 
how they’re dealing with it, and how you can address it accordingly.
• Be prepared to step in and talk to the individual as soon as you’re aware there’s a 
problem (irrespective of whether it’s a performance or behavioural issue). In many cases 
the person might be unaware of how they (or their behaviour) is perceived by others 
and will quickly – and positively – respond to a quiet word. If it’s a performance issue 
causing conflict (like poor time-keeping), encourage a conversation to understand if 
there’s in fact a deeper, underlying problem (for example, a health or personal issue).
Useful resources
Information on bullying and harassment at work  
Preventing stress: positive manager behaviour  
Supporting mental health at work  
Stress and wellbeing  
4 Be clear about your expectations of team conduct
As a manager, you’re an important role model. You’ll need to spell out what behaviour is 
not tolerated and demonstrate the positive behaviours employees should follow (in terms 
of how they interact with each other, their customers, clients and the public). 
Guidance for line managers
A guide to dealing with conflict at work7This is part of creating an environment that relates to being  open, 
respectful, kind, fair and consistent  and also providing knowledge clarity 
and guidance . Refer to Exercise 1  and Exercise 4  for more on these areas.
Things to consider
• Always maintain professionalism. Set an example by visibly living the organisation’s values 
around dignity and respect and following organisational policies and procedures.
• Respect individuals’ points of view, background and working styles, but be confident to 
call out behaviour that is unacceptable.
• Treat all employees with the same level of importance and avoid favouritism. If you don’t 
manage people equally, you’ll struggle to build working relationships based on mutual 
trust and respect. Any sign of favouritism is also likely to lead to resentment, becoming 
a cause of conflict in itself.
• Always discourage employees from talking about their colleagues behind their backs. 
Ignoring this type of behaviour can lead to resentment, cliques and a work culture 
where bullying is more likely to occur. Establish if there’s a genuine problem, and then 
deal with it openly by talking to the individuals concerned.
Useful resources
Information on bullying and harassment at work  
Stress and wellbeing  
5 Try not to get involved in office politics or gossip
Though a certain level of office gossip is inevitable and need not cause any problems, 
office politics can be a source of misunderstanding and tension. Maintain objectivity and 
resist the urge to join in; this will only add fuel to the fire.
  This is part of creating an environment that is open, respectful, kind, fair and 
consistent . Refer to Exercise 1  for advice on developing this behavioural area.
Things to consider
• If office gossip is malicious, intervene and spell out clearly, to those involved, that 
spreading unsubstantiated rumours is unacceptable and could be construed as bullying 
or harassment.
• Encourage an open working environment in which everyone’s contribution is valued.
• Always give positive feedback where it’s due to help foster collaboration and effective 
teamworking.
• Keep employee issues private and confidential. To build relationships based on trust 
you’ll need to respect employees’ privacy, particularly if the issues they discuss with you 
are of a personal nature.
Useful resources
Information on bullying and harassment at work  
Team-building  
Guidance for line managers
A guide to dealing with conflict at work8Using performance management to 
prevent conflict
Performance management should be a positive, supportive process, yet performance issues 
can sometimes be a cause of conflict themselves (for example, if someone feels they’ve been 
unfairly treated by being overlooked for promotion or received a negative performance rating). 
To manage performance effectively, you need to be open, fair and 
consistent, provide knowledge, clarity and guidance  and support 
team members’ development . Exercise 1 , Exercise 4  and Exercise 6  in 
the support materials provide advice in these areas.
Things to consider
• Manage performance proactively and positively to avoid misunderstandings or conflict 
arising. Make sure every individual is aware of the expectations on them, and how 
they’re expected to deliver.
• Set clear goals and realistic deadlines for every team member. Give everyone in your 
team all the information, training and development they need to perform their job to 
a high standard. Make sure everyone’s roles and responsibilities are well matched with 
their skills, experience and career aspirations.
• Don’t rely on a one-off appraisal meeting to assess performance – give regular and 
constructive feedback as part of a two-way conversation.
• Address poor performance at an early stage. Ask simple, open questions about how the 
employee’s doing, and whether there’s anything affecting their performance (such as a 
health or personal issue).
• The reasons for poor performance aren’t always properly understood or discussed. 
Where there are suspected or known health issues, make sure you explore these prior to 
initiating any formal procedures. Also explore whether there are any workplace issues, 
like negative relationships with colleagues, which may be impacting performance.
• If performance improvements are needed, make clear the issues that need addressing, 
and discuss any additional support needed along the way (such as extra training or 
supervision). Develop an action plan and arrange regular catch-ups to discuss progress.
Useful resources
Information on performance management 
Encouraging informal ways to 
resolve conflict
Despite the preventative measures we’ve explored above, conflict can still develop. If it 
does, you’ll need to take action to resolve it early and informally. This can appear daunting, 
but it’s a core part of your role as a manager. If you ignore unacceptable behaviour, 
problems can escalate until formal disciplinary or grievance procedures have to be used. 
This can make it much harder to achieve a successful resolution and repair relationships. 
Guidance for line managers
A guide to dealing with conflict at work9Guidance for line managers
  Developing your capacity to handle conflict and people management issues   
will allow you to step in appropriately when needed. Refer to Exercise 3  for 
advice on developing this area.
Be proactive and initiate informal discussions if you think a problem’s brewing. Conflict can 
lead to absences, so return-to-work interviews are also a good opportunity for you to ask 
questions about any issues that might be bothering employees. 
  To provide a foundation to help you have these conversations, it is 
important that you build and sustain relationships  with team members. 
Refer to Exercise 5 for more information.
Depending on the size of your organisation, your HR department should always be 
available in the event that you need informal advice to help you deal with conflict, so do 
seek appropriate support when you need it.
1 Be ready to facilitate
Make sure you engage in challenging conversations as soon as you begin to observe early 
signs of conflict (for example, a heated argument or an inappropriate personal remark). 
This shows you’re treating the conflict seriously and is a key part of handling conflict and 
people management issues. It’s more difficult to be respected if you’ve appeared to give 
certain behaviours tacit approval by letting a situation drift on for weeks or months and 
may impede your capacity to build an environment in your team that is open, respectful, 
kind, fair and consistent, in which people feel ‘psychologically safe’.
  This relates closely to the behaviour area being open, respectful, fair and 
consistent . Look at Exercise 1 for advice on how to develop this area.
Things to consider
• Intervene quickly in cases of conflict. Deal with issues head on in a sensitive, fair and 
constructive way.
• Encourage people to talk. Listen carefully to their concerns. Help the individuals involved 
to identify the root of their disagreement.
• Remain objective. Avoid taking sides or making hasty judgements and listen to 
everyone’s views and concerns. Make sure you fully understand all the issues at play, 
including any underlying tensions.
• Try to establish what the individuals need to happen to resolve matters or move forward, 
and any changes or compromises they’re prepared to make in their behaviour or attitudes.
2 Speak to each team member individually
If there’s an open disagreement between colleagues or you suspect a conflict is 
developing, start by having an informal, one-to-one discussion with each of the individuals 
concerned. This will help you identify the crux of the problem while giving you an 
opportunity to hear people’s concerns in a safe, confidential setting. 
A guide to dealing with conflict at work10Guidance for line managers  Building and sustaining relationships  with team members will provide a 
foundation for these conversations, while having these conversations will help 
enhance relationships going forward. Exercise 5  provides support in this area.
Things to consider
• Choose an appropriate place. It’s important to make people feel comfortable, so it’s 
good to have the conversation somewhere private and quiet.
• Avoid making assumptions. Many people find it difficult to open up about problems at 
work, let alone dealing with conflict itself. Keep an open mind and give them the space 
to talk it out.
• Always act with integrity and maintain confidentiality. Reassure the employee that the 
private information they disclose will stay confidential, and that you’ll only pass this 
information onto the other person with their permission.
3 Bring both sides together to communicate
Once you’ve gained a clear understanding of the conflict (as well as everyone’s different 
perspectives on the problem), bring the parties together and act as an objective facilitator to 
find common ground. Your capacity to do this skilfully will depend not only on your ability 
to handle conflict and people management issues, but also your having built and sustained 
relationships and created an environment that is open, respectful, kind, fair and consistent.
This relates closely to the behaviour area building and sustaining 
relationships  and being  open, fair and consistent . Look at Exercise 3  and 
Exercise 5  for advice on how to develop these areas.
Things to consider
• Encourage people to acknowledge their colleague’s views and concerns so that they see 
both sides of the situation.
• Take a problem-solving, constructive approach. Encourage the individuals to discuss any 
changes that can be made by either side to help find solutions and move forward.
• Remain impartial and objective. Avoid taking sides and focus on helping the individuals 
to discuss their options and reach a resolution.
4 Protect employees by removing them from conflict situations
In those instances where conflict has become particularly heated, it might simply be 
untenable (when one considers the needs of the rest of the team) to keep the disruptive 
colleague present. In these cases, in order to handle the conflict effectively, it might be 
necessary to temporarily separate team members who are in a conflict situation to prevent 
the situation from escalating. 
  This relates closely to the behaviour area handling conflict and people 
management issues . Look at Exercise 3  for advice.
A guide to dealing with conflict at work11Guidance for line managersThings to consider
• Understand what to do in the event of a major disagreement. If attempts to calm the 
situation down do not improve things, the risk is that someone will do or say something 
in the heat of the moment that could become a bigger source of grievance than the 
original problem.
• Once the disputing parties have been physically separated (where organisational size 
permits), it should be possible to have a calmer, more rational conversation about what 
sparked the disagreement and find a possible resolution.
• Consider transferring the disruptive team member to another team or area – only where 
fair, necessary and feasible. In some circumstances there may be personality clashes 
that are hard to resolve, or a particular member of staff who consistently causes conflict. 
If so, consider whether it could be helpful for the individual to move to a different job 
role or team, which they may be more suited to. Any change would have to follow full 
consultation with the individual.
5 Gather ideas on how to address conflict from within the team
In those cases where a dispute affects the whole team (for example, as a result of tensions 
arising from having to meet particular deadlines, or changes to working practices), hold 
a discussion or brainstorming meeting to find possible solutions. This will work most 
effectively when you have built good relationships with team members and created a 
culture in your team that is open, respectful, kind, fair and consistent, in which people feel 
‘psychologically safe’ (where people feel they can speak up and share concerns, questions 
or ideas freely without being criticised or made to feel ‘wrong’ for doing so).
This relates closely to the behaviour area building and sustaining 
relationships  and being  open, fair and consistent . Look at Exercise 3  and 
Exercise 5  for advice on how to develop these areas.
Things to consider
• Use one-to-ones with employees and listen to different people’s perspectives to get a 
clear picture of what exactly is creating team disharmony. 
• Help prevent future instances of conflict by having regular consultations with your team. 
This ensures you consider their views before introducing any changes that might affect 
their work or working environment.
6 Follow up on conflicts after resolution
It’s tempting to hope that, once a conflict’s been resolved, the problem’s gone away for good. 
In many cases, however, one party or another will still feel aggrieved (to a greater or lesser 
extent). Part of handling conflict effectively is following up as appropriate to check that the 
issues have been resolved and continuing to sustain good relationships with team members.
This relates closely to the behaviour area handling conflict and people 
management issues and building and sustaining relationships . Look at 
Exercise 3  and Exercise 5  for advice on how to develop these areas.

A guide to dealing with conflict at work12Things to consider
• Talk to the individuals involved during one-to-ones, or during discussions around 
performance appraisals, to find out whether the conflict really has been resolved, or if 
there are any renewed tensions or feelings of unhappiness.
• Regular one-to-ones serve as ‘temperature checks’ to ensure that old disagreements do 
not resurface.
The last resort: using formal 
procedures to resolve conflict
Even when you have made every effort to resolve the conflict, sometimes, the situation can 
develop to the point where it’s appropriate to use formal procedures to address unresolved 
conflict (when, for example, an allegation of serious harassment occurs, or if a complainant 
has requested the situation be investigated). 
Please note that formal methods should only be used if absolutely necessary, and in 
those cases where informal problem-solving has been unsuccessful.
If a complaint is serious or the individual wants it investigated formally, they should 
have the right to pursue a grievance. Where serious incidents occur – such as alleged 
harassment or discrimination, persistent bullying or out-of-character outbursts of verbal 
abuse or physical intimidation – they must be dealt with and taken seriously.
Avoid shying away from using the formal disciplinary process in those cases where an 
individual’s misconduct or underperformance demands it. One of the most important 
judgements you’ll need to make as a manager is to recognise the point at which informal 
approaches to dispute resolution have failed and formal disciplinary action needs to be taken. 
You will need to draw on all your ability to handle conflict and people management issues, build 
and sustain relationships, and be open, respectful, kind, fair and consistent if you need to do 
this. HR can provide useful advice at this point, so seek appropriate support when you need it. 
This relates closely to the behaviour areas handling conflict and 
people management issues , building and sustaining relationships  
and being open, fair and consistent . Look at Exercise 3 , Exercise 5  
and Exercise 1  for advice on developing these areas.
Key takeaways
• Good people management is fundamental to fostering positive working relationships in your 
team and wider organisation, spotting early signs of conflict, and initiating early intervention.
• Managing conflict is an integral part of your role as a manager. To a large degree, it’s about 
good communication, providing ongoing feedback, and effective coaching and development. 
It’s also about recognising good work and effective performance management.
• Always make your expectations for performance clear. Address poor performance at an 
early stage, and always in a positive way. Performance management goes a long way in 
preventing the build-up of conflict.
Guidance for line managers
A guide to dealing with conflict at work13• Understand how conflict can occur and be alert to any signs of it (including bullying 
and harassment). Challenge any kind of inappropriate behaviour immediately to foster a 
culture based on dignity and respect.
• Get to know your team and treat every person with the same importance.
• Lead by example, and continually reflect on your management style. Appreciate 
the impact your behaviour can have on people. Aim to be open, collaborative and 
supportive as a manager.
• Monitor team relationships so that you’re aware of any simmering tensions between 
people. Use one-to-ones to have informal conversations about any concerns your team 
may have.
• Conflict will only escalate if it’s left alone. Be confident to tackle it head on and get to 
the root of the problem.
• Aim to resolve conflict early and informally and take a problem-solving approach to help 
people reach consensus and move on.
• Use formal procedures, where appropriate, to resolve conflict.
Read our research on conflict management, our report Managing Conflict in the Modern 
Workplace , which examines the current state of working relationships in UK organisations.
 
Consider using the full range of support materials if you haven’t 
already done so
If reading this guide has highlighted areas of people management capability that 
you would like to develop, why not use the full range of support materials to help 
you adopt a management approach that supports good health, wellbeing and 
engagement in your team?
You can get insight into your management capability across all five behavioural 
areas by completing the quiz and then use the  step-by-step guidance  to help 
you get feedback, identify strengths and areas to develop, and plan the action 
you will take. There is also an action plan sheet , which can be used to note 
down and track your actions; a quiz to help you identify potential barriers and 
develop strategies to overcome them; and a series of exercises  to provide ideas 
and inspiration relevant to each of the behavioural areas, some of which have 
already been highlighted above.
Guidance for line managers

Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development
151 The Broadway  London  SW19 1JQ  United Kingdom 
T +44 (0)20 8612 6200  F +44 (0)20 8612 6201
E cipd@cipd.co.uk  W cipd.co.uk
Incorporated by Royal Charter   
Registered as a charity in England and Wales (1079797)  
Scotland (SC045154) and Ireland (20100827) 
Issued: January 2021  Reference: 8102  © CIPD 2021
