URL: https://www.quorum.us/blog/stakeholder-engagement/

Stakeholder Engagement: Definition | Quorum
Skip to main content
Turn political giving into strategic insight with Campaign Finance data.
Learn More
Menu
Why Quorum?
Everything you need — all in one place
Never Miss a Mention
Stay ahead of policy changes with legislation and dialogue tracking across the US and the EU.
Drive More Impact
Engage advocates and drive targeted actions with best-in-class grassroots advocacy software.
Build Stronger Relationships
Easily manage stakeholders with one platform to organize, monitor, contact, and report.
Cut Through the Noise
Uncover the news stories you care about to increase visibility and foresight into the policy landscape
Human-Verified Contacts
Stay connected in Washington and all 50 states with official, staffer, executive, and agency contacts.
Hassle-Free Compliance
Collect donations, increase PAC participation, and file with ease.
Explore Quorum
Book a Demo
Customer Stories
Customer Reviews
Press
Solutions
AI for Public Affairs
Analyze complex legislation, surface real-time policy insights, and draft personalized outreach with Copilot, Quorum’s AI-powered assistant.
Legislative and Regulatory Tracking
Stay ahead of emerging policy developments with access to legislation and dialogue across Congress, all 50 states, and the EU.
Grassroots Advocacy
Engage advocates and drive targeted actions with grassroots advocacy software.
Stakeholder Management & Engagement
Easily manage relationships with one platform to organize, monitor, and report.
PAC Management
Stay compliant, raise money, and report results with modern, easy-to-use tools.
Social Media Tracking
Be the first to know about key dialogue, from social media to committee hearings to newsletters and beyond.
Government Contact Data
The most accurate contact data for government elected officials, their staff, and influencers in the industry – powered by KnowWho.
Public Sector
Get immediate alerts for legislation or news that could impact your agency, so you can prepare and react quickly.
Reporting
Visualize, understand, and report on all of your public affairs work in real-time.
Professional Services
Spend your time on what matters most while Quorum handles the legwork.
State Legislatures
Track and triage legislation, align caucuses, and act faster with real-time intelligence.
Agencies and Law Firms
Customizable AI workspace streamlines management across all your client portfolios.
Products
Federal
Track federal policy trends and stakeholders with AI-powered insights.
State
Stay ahead of state bills and regulations with AI Bill Tracking.
Grassroots
Turn advocate data into smarter, targeted advocacy with AI.
PAC
Optimize PAC strategy with AI insights on donors and fundraising.
Local
Spot policy trends in city and county agendas with AI analysis.
School Board
Track education policy shifts from district agendas nationwide.
Stakeholder
Manage and personalize stakeholder engagement with intelligent insights.
Professional Services
Focus on strategy while our team of experts handle day-to-day tasks.
EU and International
KnowWho
Mobile App
Add-on
Impact Reports
Campaign Finance
Collaborator
News Monitoring
API & Data Integration
Pricing
Case Studies
Resources
Blog
Practical insights and guides for government affairs professionals.
Case Studies
See how organizations leverage data and strategy to drive change.
Data-Driven Insights
In-depth analysis and trends shaping policy and advocacy.
Reports
Comprehensive research on key legislative and advocacy trends.
Wonk Week 2025
Check out the recordings to a dozen Wonk Week sessions with public affairs pros.
Webinars
Expert-led discussions on emerging trends and best practices.
Templates
Downloadable tools to streamline your advocacy and engagement efforts.
Product Tours
See Quorum in action. Interactive demos of Quorum’s AI-powered platform.
Customer Resources
All the tools, training, and support you need in one place.
ROI Calculator
Measure the impact of your government affairs strategy.
Login
Talk to Sales
Your browser is outdated.
Upgrade to a modern browser
to better experience this site.
Your browser has turned off or is blocking Javascript.
If you are using a content blocker, check to see that you have not globally turned off Javascript.
If you have turned it off manually in your browser, please enable it to better experience this site.
Blog
Jan 31, 2024
Stakeholder Engagement: What, Why & How
8 mins read
Share
Share
Share
Share
What is Stakeholder Engagement?
Stakeholders are individuals or organizations that have a stake in your success and can affect your ability to achieve your goals. In public affairs, stakeholders could be elected officials, staffers, regulators, grassroots activists, employees, shareholders, etc.
Stakeholder engagement
is the process of cultivating relationships with stakeholders with the goal of influencing their actions related to your organization’s goals. Stakeholder engagement is critical for any organization serious about creating change, as leveraging third-party relationships increases the overall effectiveness of a public affairs campaign.
Keep reading to learn more about best practices for stakeholder engagement, including stakeholder mapping, communications, and reporting.
Stakeholder Engagement: A Best Practices Framework
At Quorum, we work with Fortune 500 companies and growing nonprofits alike, and we’ve seen countless approaches to stakeholder engagement. Here’s a glimpse into a framework that we’ve seen work.
Define your Objective
Map Stakeholders
Prioritize Stakeholders with a Tier System
Define the Relationship Owner
Mark the Quality of the Existing Relationship
Set Your Engagement Targets
Report and Track Your Engagement
Define Your Objective
What is your goal for your stakeholders? Are you looking to activate them and have them advocate on your behalf? Or are you just looking to keep tabs on them to inform your own practices? Write out what you are trying to accomplish and make sure your team is aligned with the goal.
Map Out the Stakeholders Who Matter
Organizations should identify their stakeholders by outlining the universe of people that could impact the organization and its issues. Here are a few examples of who your stakeholders may be:
Policy: elected officials, legislative staff, regulators, public authorities
Corporate: employees, customers, competitors, investors, shareholders
Industry:  labor unions, NGOs, press
Community: organizers/activists, schools, resident associations, religious organizations
Region(s): federal, regional, state, local, international
Other
You may decide to just focus on one type of stakeholders – i.e. state legislators, mayors, or members of the media for this process. You can always come back and do it again for a different type of stakeholder.
Prioritize Stakeholders into Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3
Once you have identified your universe of stakeholders, arrange them into three tiered buckets: Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3. The most important thing you want to do is avoid having too many stakeholders in your first or second tier and force the prioritization of which stakeholders are most important.
One of the most strategic ways to do this is by interest and influence:
Tier 1 stakeholders are interested and influential
Tier 2 stakeholders are influential
Tier 3 stakeholders and interested
You can also choose a different qualitative descriptor to define your Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3 stakeholders — just make sure you limit the number of people who can be in each tier so not everyone is a Tier 1 stakeholder.
Define the Relationship Owner
Assign a relationship owner to each stakeholder so it is clear who the primary person responsible for the relationship is. This can be done based on how the organization divides its stakeholder coverage model (geography, chamber on the Hill, or political party).
We’ve also seen this done via a lottery draft where the team goes through tier by tier and person by person, and everyone picks the stakeholders they most want to engage. Team members will prioritize stakeholders with whom they have the strongest relationship early in the process, and any disagreement can be resolved at that time.
Finally, you can take it to the next level by assigning leaders in your organization to be the second chair on the relationships with the most important stakeholders.
Mark the Quality of the Existing Relationship
Next up, identify the quality of the relationship that your organization has with the stakeholder. You can use qualitative descriptions for this step:
No relationship
Knows our team
Knows our issues
Supports our issues
Willing to take action on our behalf
Go through each stakeholder and determine where each relationship stands. At the end of the process, you should be able to quantify how many stakeholders fall into each category.
These questions map the status quo of the relationships with existing stakeholders and the basis against which to measure engagement impact (which we’ll get to later).
Set Your Engagement Targets
Now that you’ve done the hard work, the fun part begins. Set your relationship targets. How often do you want to meet with your Tier 1, Tier 2, and Tier 3 stakeholders a year? And how many of them do you want to move from “no relationship” to “knows team” or from “knows team” to “supports your issues.”
Reporting and Tracking Your Engagement
As you set out to engage your stakeholders, track how many times you met with them and if you successfully moved them up the relationship ladder. You will get two reports throughout the year:
Report 1 – Frequency of Engagement with Key Stakeholders
: The first report will allow you to monitor if you are hitting your stakeholder engagement goals. Did you meet with your Tier 1 stakeholders each month? This will help you make sure you don’t miss any stakeholders.
Report 2 – How Did Stakeholders Move up the Relationship Ladder?:
Second, you should report on how many stakeholders moved up (or down) the engagement ladder. At the end of the year, you will be able to report on how many relationships moved from “knowing our team” to “supporting our issues” or from “no relationship” to being “aware of our issues.”
How to Improve Stakeholder Engagement with Digital Tools
Your stakeholders are critical to your business. Whether there is a legislative issue your organization cares about or a brand message you want to share widely, your Tier 1 stakeholders have the interest and influence to make an impact on your bottom line. Given the impact of stakeholders on an organization, it makes sense to use a
stakeholder engagement tool
to stay organized and on top of your goals.
Digital tools can aid in improving your stakeholder engagement strategy by helping you:
Keep Track of Stakeholders with a CRM
Identify and Map Stakeholders with Social Media Monitoring
Log Meetings with Stakeholders
Communicate with Your Stakeholders with Outbox
Build Digital Reports and Dashboards
Keep Track of Stakeholders with a CRM
Using a stakeholder CRM makes it easier to keep track of your objectives and stakeholders. For example, you could use a CRM to assign relationship values like no relationship, knows our team, supports our issues, etc. You could also assign values based on their interest and influence, making it easier to build an influence-interest matrix. With Quorum, users can build spreadsheets with columns of influence and interest and map these onto a graph showing where stakeholders land.
Identify and Map Stakeholders with Social Media Monitoring
In the above section, we covered how and why you should place your stakeholders into tiers. Unless you already have an extensive database of stakeholder sentiment, this can be very difficult to keep track of.
Using a social media monitoring tool like Quorum, you can search for your issues and see how elected officials are talking (or not talking) about your issues. This can be very useful for identifying officials interested in your issues, which helps when placing them into categories.
For example, there may be a member of Congress whom your office hasn’t met with before but mentions your issue frequently on X. With a tool that includes social media monitoring, you’ll never miss a mention of issues your organization cares about and can
identify new champions
(or detractors) on your issue.
Log Meetings with Stakeholders
One common issue we see with stakeholder engagement is that notes from a meeting are either kept in someone’s head or in a private notebook — whether physical or digital. This can be a major problem when someone leaves an organization and takes with them all of their meeting notes.
Logging meetings with stakeholders
in a shared database is an effective way to improve stakeholder engagement and retain institutional knowledge as it provides a searchable resource so that any team member can get up-to-speed on conversations with each stakeholder.
Communicate with Your Stakeholders with Outbox
It is advantageous for teams to use a centralized system, like Quorum’s Outbox, to send messages to stakeholders. This keeps everything in one place so team members can track responses and update stakeholder information in a unified platform — which makes reporting even easier.
Build Digital Reports and Dashboards
Measuring your stakeholder engagement efforts helps identify what strategies move the needle on your issues. For example, what activities best nudge stakeholders along the engagement ladder? With this knowledge, your organization can adjust engagement strategies.
We previously mentioned two reports: one that tracks the frequency of your meetings and another that tracks the influence of those meetings. Building these reports becomes automatic if you use a tool like Quorum to log your meetings and manage your stakeholders. You can then add these reports to a shareable dashboard to quickly showcase your team’s work.
Manage Stakeholder Engagement with Quorum
By using
Quorum to manage stakeholder engagement
, you can connect your efforts all in one platform. You can upload and organize your contacts, track meeting activity, communicate with stakeholders, and create auto-updating reports — all in one place.
Contact Info
1001 G St NW
Washington, DC 20001
(202) 972-9980
[email protected]
Our Social Networking Accounts
Facebook
LinkedIn
Twitter
Donor Look Up Tool
Solutions
Bill & Legislative Tracking Software
Regulatory Tracking Software
Grassroots Advocacy Software Solutions
Stakeholder Management & Engagement Software
PAC Management Software
Professional & Managed Services
Visual Reporting Software
Government Software Solutions
Agencies and Law Firms
Products
Federal
State
Grassroots
PAC
Copilot
Local
School Board
Stakeholder
EU and International
Professional Services
KnowWho
Mobile App
PAC Classic
Impact Reports
Collaborator
News Monitoring
Campaign Finance
API & Data Integration
Pricing
Top Content
Government Relations Strategic Plan Template
Advocacy Strategy Plan Template
Public Affairs Strategy Template
Download & Build an Effective Stakeholder Engagement Matrix
Three Examples of Effective Government Relations Strategy
Three Examples of Successful Public Affairs Strategy
Seven Examples of Effective Grassroots Advocacy Campaigns
Five Examples of Stakeholder Engagement Strategy
10 Innovations For Your Public Affairs Strategy
About
Company
Careers
Press
Security
Status
Sign up to receive best practices and product announcements.
© 2025 Quorum Analytics LLC. All Rights Reserved. Quorum Analytics is not affiliated with, licensed, endorsed, or sponsored by Leidos Innovations Technology or its affiliates.
Privacy Policy
Search for:
Search Button